#   -*- mode: org; fill-column: 60 -*-

#+TITLE: 3. Human Cognition Introduction
#+STARTUP: showall
#+TOC: headlines 4
#+PROPERTY: filename
#+LINK: pdf   pdfview:~/proj/chenla/hoard/lib/

[[https://img.shields.io/badge/made%20by-Chenla%20Institute-999999.svg?style=flat-square]] 
[[https://img.shields.io/badge/class-w & w-56B4E9.svg?style=flat-square]]
[[https://img.shields.io/badge/type-work-0072B2.svg?style=flat-square]]
[[https://img.shields.io/badge/status-wip-D55E00.svg?style=flat-square]]
[[https://img.shields.io/badge/licence-MIT%2FCC%20BY--SA%204.0-000000.svg?style=flat-square]]

bibliography:~/proj/chenla/hoard/bib.bib

[[[../../index.org][top]]] [[[../index.org][up]]]

* 3. Human Cognition Introduction
  :PROPERTIES:
  :CUSTOM_ID: 
  :Name:      /home/deerpig/proj/chenla/warp/01/03/03/intro.org
  :Created:   2018-05-31T12:09@Prek Leap (11.642600N-104.919210W)
  :ID:        054fd905-9078-4d41-bab5-c53578a4ef7c
  :VER:       581015459.200312768
  :GEO:       48P-491193-1287029-15
  :BXID:      proj:BVT5-8761
  :Class:     primer
  :Type:      work
  :Status:    wip
  :Licence:   MIT/CC BY-SA 4.0
  :END:

#+begin_quote
I don't have a way to change the behavior of
seven-point-five billion people carrying their beliefs
around like precious ges wrapped in hand grenades.

-- [[http://theoatmeal.com/comics/believe][You're not going to believe what I'm about to tell you]] | The Oatmeal
#+end_quote

** Introduction

It would be useful to have a theory of the absolute limits
of cognition.  Can cognition infinitely scale or are there
hard limits.

Physical computation has physical limits in terms of energy
and storage -- but computation isn't the same as cognition
(is it?  I have to think about that).  But for now let's say
that computation â‰  cognition.

I think the whole map/territory relationship will be one of
the biggest limits.  But also how fast information can
propagate -- it's one thing to say that the entire universe
is a computation engine -- but if information travels at the
speed of light, then it will take millions and billions of
years to complete a thought -- and there universe only has
been around only a few more billions of years than than can
be counted on two hands.  Of course there is quantum
entanglement, spooky action at a distence,  but there is no
evidence at present to suggest that this is being used by
the universe in any way other than to literally keep it's
shit together.  But then, we really don't know, or
understand quantum entanglement except that it's real and it
really messes with your head.

But the map/territory problem, to me, is the real show
stopper and would seem to make it impossible for a conscious
omniscient intelligence who existed everywhere and knew
everything at the same time (which is the definition of a
monothesitic deity) to exist as part of the universe.  Such
a thing would have to be outside of the unviverse, which
again is possible, but then it would still run up against
the same map/territory problem outside of the universe.  It
might be omniscient of our universe, but not the universe at
it's own scale.

In other words, there may well be gods, but they are only
gods, relative to ourselves at our scale.  And this begs the
question that if this is true, then how far can it scale?
If it's turtles all the way down, is size really real?  Is
the multiverse just a single grain of sand of many
multiverses?

** cognition as territory

It came to me last night, just as I was ready to close up
the office, that the reason that intelligence is a black
box is because in the map-territory relation, once a
cognitive system reaches a certain threshold of complexity, 
can no longer be legible.

You can't separate intelligence from the information that it
emerged from.  Humans are not naturally intelligent, when we
are born we have some preprogrammed behavior but other than
that there isn't much there.  But as babies observe the
world, they start to identify patterns from sensory
information and from experimenting with that information and
finding out what works and what doesn't.  We don't become
intelligent, and perhaps even self-conscious until we have
ingested enough information to understand what we are and
some concept of what the world is like.  So the training
data set is what we take in, crunch it up and become
intelligent.  But what happens to that training data is
unknown.  We don't record like a camera or microphone, we
create maps of patterns that become memories -- and memories
are reconstructions of sensory events, that are likely never
really ever the same twice.  We constantly reinventing our
memories relative to the present.

The other point to make is that intelligence has to include
not just what happened, but what we think might happen and
how probable those outcomes may be.  So our mind is not a
storehouse of facts, it is in fact a fnord, embracing a wide
range of posibilities.  In in that sense, every mind is made
up of a large number of interconneted fnords which
constitute a territory in it's own right.  Our brains are
not maps of the world, though we are constantly building and
maintaining a model of the world.  But that model is not a
map it's a territory -- and territories are not maps.  Maps
simplify and make territories legible.

So intelligent systems will never be legible in the way we
would like because they are unintelligible and illegible
worlds.  This is messy, no question about it.  And it will
be frustrating, because it will be true of machine
intelligences no less than it is of meat intelligences.
It's sort of the uncertainty principle for Intelligence.

This is not to say that we won't eventually be able to ask
AIs why they came up with an answer, or why they did
something but they will have to do it the way we did, by
coming up with a plausible reason that fits the facts.  That
doesn't mean that this is really why or how, but it will
have to be good enough.  And when it does, the AI will be
rationalizing its actions, building an argument for why and
how, rather than replaying what it did like a video that
explains step by step it's detailed reasoning.  There will
be times that it knows that it based its action on the
probability of x y z outcomes that were used to create a
scenario -- but there will be all sorts of things that will
/feel/ like the right solution and will go with that, but
not be able to explain why it felt right.

This theory, if it pans out will be yet another nail in the
human exceptionalist coffin and will make a number of people
deeply uncomfortable.

This is why things like BMF is so important, AIs will need
to externally document what they find, just like we do.
Their minds will not be recording devices, they will need to
externalize their thoughts, and experiences and use other
dumb compuational computers (cloud) to do specialized number
crunching.  Take this to the next step, and like Kevin Kelly
envisions, every intelligence will be different, there will
be no one general AI that does everything.  AIs will have to
google things, and they will have to compose their thoughts
like we do, as way of learning and understanding.  Our AIs
will be a transactive species like us -- and will relying on
each other and us, just we rely on each other and them.
Each is a holon, and together we are a whole.

So yes, our AIs will be looking up stuff in the OED and on
Wikipedia and puzzling out search results.  They won't do it
the way we do, but it comes down to the same thing -- our
AIs will have to make the world legible and interact with
the world, but they will also have to write stuff down and
communicate it with others -- they will have to
collaborate.  And they will end up in edit wars on Wikipedia
as well.  And it's not really certain if or when they will
be much better at than we are, though they will be
/faster/.  They'll need to keep us around because there will
be times with meat processing will come up with things that
they can't because we are using a different architecture
from theirs.  Perhaps we'll be the mystics and gurus for the
machines, who can find answers that they can not....


The Borg are simply a distributed cloud -- and the cloud is
an intelligence.  But when humans embrace AIs as an
extension of themselves and a part of the larger concept of
mankind then we are all holons and we all form larger wholes
which are part of larger holons.

The other thing that I was thinking about last night is how
to measure intelligence -- hell, how does one even /define/
intelligence?  One way to look at it is, again to think of
it as a fnord -- the smarter you are, the more causal chains
you can pick out in a each collection of fnords.  One
assertion may have many different possible causal chains,
but when you start adding more and more fnords, the
complexity of how many causal chains that are possible
quickly become overwhelming.  Perhaps the smarter you are,
the better or broader you ability to integrate more and more
causal chains so that your mind -- which is a world, grows
and becomes more complex.  I'm not articulating this very
well at the moment becuase I'm still trying to explore the
concept.  But it is an intriguing idea.

A calculator is dumb as paint -- it takes inputs and does a
calculation and that's that.  But a bit of code with an if
then statement actually thinks -- it takes an input and
evaluates between two or more possibilities and comes up
with an answer -- the if then statement embraces a number of
different causal inputs.

If we create a bunch of if then statements that run in
parallel, so that each is looking for something different we
have something even more interesting.  So if we have a pile
of fruit, and then chunks of code which each are looking for
a different kind of fruit, and the same input is then sent
to all the fruit identifiers, you might get one of them that
says -- ah, an apple!  The others might say, alas, not a
pinapple, or blast it's not a mango, or damn, it's not a
rambutan.  But that's getting ahead of ourselves.  We first
need pattern matchers to figure out if what it is looking at
is a fruit or something else like a rock.  So you might have
a level of parallel pattern matchers that are looking for
things that organic and edible and grow on trees.  At each
level several pattern matchers will fire off 'I found it'
and pattern matchers at the level above who are waiting for
things that in turn tell them they found what they are
looking for.  So that eventually, once you know it's a
fruit, the color layer will say I found yellow, and the ripe
mango and banana matches above say they found yellow fruits.
But only the banana matcher will also see that's the yellow
fruit is long and faceted and in a bunch.  Which the mango
matcher will ignore and say 'doh'.

I only explain all of this because this is how our neocortex
works as well as machine learning software.  And in each
case we have a pattern matcher that works a little like an
if then statement -- that is aware of a range of different
possible things.  Taken all of these pattern matchers
together working in parallel and we have a system which
quickly becomes far more complex than the sum of its parts.

Add to that, that every new input that goes through the
matching tree, also improves and changes individual
patterns.  Each matcher that finds a positive or a negative
is strengthened and becomes more complex and confident in
what it is looking at.  This means that the system is not
the same as a traditional piece of software that is run and
will do the same thing every time it is run -- a machine
learning system is always growing and changing.  That, in
effect is why it is a territory and not a map.  In other
words, you can never step in the same river twice, and by
the time you ask the river what it was, it is no longer the
same river and can not answer because it does not know.

So finally, how does this effect the idea I had before, that
total omniscient gods can't exist because that would make
them a territory?  I have to look it up, but I think I then
said that our minds are maps.... so yes, this contradicts
that.  Or does it?  Our minds are worlds, but they are
holons which are part of larger holons.  Our minds could not
be worlds without a larger world to get it's training data.
mind-worlds are dependent on physical worlds.  So if the
universe is a mind, and a God, then it must be part of
something larger we can't see that gives it its training
data otherwise it is not a mind.  And our universe is a
world, which allows that God to act within its larger
universe, not act all god-like in it's own mind.

I'm coming to think of this as the god-clause, that protects
universes from being ravished by Gods. Either way is doesn't
look good for mono-theistic belief systems.  But there is no
reason why there could be a bunch of lesser gods which have
all sorts of superpowers we can't fathom.


** The Black Box

Our brains have always been black boxes -- just like the
emerging AI systems we are building.  Stop worrying about
not knowing what happens inside the black box so much as
worrying about how the black boxes will externalize and
communicate and remember the shit that comes out of the box.
Treat AI's as the same as our brains and construct tools
that extend those black boxes so that other AIs and humans
can work out what is good and bad and bullshit and the rest.
The collective is the best means of checking and balancing
-- not handicapping.  Shit goes in and shit goes out and you
deal with what comes out and don't work so much about what
happens in between.  If someone goes off the rails then they
are cut out.  It's the system that has to regulate -- there
won't be any one AI that could dominate and do what people
are scared of at the moment, unless we don't even try to pay
attention to the shit that comes out.  This is not magic,
it's how everything works in nature.  It's why scientists
who work in biotech aren't worried about gray goo -- nature
is far more robust than we think -- and that's how we have
to build AI.

Perhaps that isn't clear -- brains kept externalizing by
building other brains around them, and then we externalized
outside the body with spoken language, then written
language, the external cognition and external muscle.

Each of our brains are black boxes to the the other parts of
our brains.

AI's will externalize in the same way -- by building layers
on layers that don't replace the layers beneath them.  These
layers should in principle work as pace layers when they
work, and shearing layers when they don't.

We assume that AIs will be able to replace themselves
completely -- but that can't happen because it's not the
same as creating whole new brains that replace the old one
-- there is no bridge to make that happen, so we will end up
with crufty AIs that will be complex nested black boxes that
will still have to talk to other black boxes and we're back
to the same messy situation that humans have to deal with
today.

Okay -- I'm not quite finished yet, but I'm not sure where
this fits in within what I just wrote above....

So far we've talked about the territory, but not maps.  A
mind contains a lot of maps -- in a sense that's all a mind
is, a bunch of maps that taken together constitute a world.
The more maps, the closer we get to the sum total of maps
becoming fnords in their own right.

A map is an expression of a pattern that has been observed
in the external world.  So observation is the key to
everything here.  When you observe, you are not observing
the totality of the probability cloud that makes up a fnord
by a subset of causal chains that have some sort of internal
consistency -- we cannot take in everything in a fnord,
which is why in the double-slit experiment we can observe it
as a wave or particle.  The cool thing is that it looks like
this is not a human limitation, but something that is baked
into the universe itself.

So conscious observation, is not special to us, but just a
feature that we can do because that's how the universe
works.  But it also helps us understand why the map
territory relationship is an expression of observation, and
that intelligence can not be understood without
understanding the dual nature of the universe.



** Complex systems as a black box


It might well be that all /intelligences/, because they are
complex systems, will always be a black box, human, machine,
whatever.  That that's the deal.  What goes in, might be
legible, what comes out, might be legible as well.  But the
complexity makes whatever happens inbetween illegible and
that if you try to take it apart and make sense of it, you
will just get a sum of it's parts, not a legible
intelligance.  The AIs we are building are ourselves.
That's the bargin and we might just have to live with it.

Can this be proved?  That intelligences are illegible?

If it turns out that human intelligence is not just
happening at the biological level, but that there are 
quantum effects that are involved... then the answer is
yes.  And it likely won't be as difficult as we think to
build machine intelligence that does the same thing in a
different way.  But what if it's not?  What if it is all
electro-chemical computation?  It still might not be
knowable.  Just as we can't know the weather -- once you
cross a complexity threshold it becomes a black box.


** Molecular Biology is Hard

#+begin_quote
Because molecular biology is wayyyyyyyyyyyyyy harder than
non-biologists realize, in large part due to people thinking
'genetic code' means something like software code, when it
was intended to be analogous to cryptographic codes instead.

The human genome is not the source code for the human body,
but rather a parts list, and an incomplete one at
that. Unfortunately, it's encrypted. Fortunately, we broke
the code 50 years ago. Unfortunately, it was also written in
Klingon. We've spent 50 years trying to translate it
(determine protein crystal/NMR structures), and
simultaneously trying to figure out how the parts go
together. We're maybe 20% through with the
translation. Weâ€™re much further behind on figuring out how
it actually works. Completing the translation of the parts
list would be helpful, but itâ€™s no panacea.

The list of what we donâ€™t know (and canâ€™t predict from
protein structures alone) is far larger than what we do
know. Which proteins are expressed in which cells? Which
proteins interact with each other? When do they interact
with each other? How strong are those interactions? What
non-protein molecules do they make, and in what
concentrations? And keep in mind that each and every one of
those questions affects the others, often in ways that make
no freaking sense, because evolution is dumb.

As for protein structure prediction, maybe weâ€™ll get there
eventually, but Iâ€™m skeptical; de novo prediction really
hasnâ€™t made much progress in recent years. Computational
methods are still terrible at the (to my mind) much simpler
problem of predicting if/how drugs bind to known protein
structures, which does not make me optimistic. Weâ€™re pretty
good at predicting structures through homology, mind you,
but thatâ€™s a much simpler problem than going straight from
the amino acid sequence.

To get a broader sense of why biologists tend to be
skeptical that computational modeling can replace
experimental biology any time soon, see [[http://blogs.sciencemag.org/pipeline/archives/2017/04/28/software-eats-the-world-but-biology-eats-it][this recent piece]]
and the longer article that it links to.

-- [[https://www.reddit.com/user/zmil][zmil]] (comment)
   [[https://www.reddit.com/r/slatestarcodex/comments/688g0a/the_ai_cargo_cult_kevin_kellys_skepticism_of/]['The AI Cargo Cult': Kevin Kelly's skepticism of superhuman AI]] | slatestarcodex
#+end_quote

** We Arenâ€™t Built to Live in the Moment (NYT article)

- [[https://mobile.nytimes.com/2017/05/19/opinion/sunday/why-the-future-is-always-on-your-mind.html?referer=https://t.co/OcAMCcjA2H][We Arenâ€™t Built to Live in the Moment]] | New York Times

- [[http://rstb.royalsocietypublishing.org/content/362/1481/773][The cognitive neuroscience of constructive memory:
  remembering the past and imagining the future]] |
  Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B:
  Biological Sciences DOI: 10.1098/rstb.2007.2087 ([[bib:schacter:2007cognitive][local]])


What struck me, reading the NYT article was something that
didn't occur to anyone in the HN discussion thread.  If we
are not wired to live in the moment -- it means that the
moment is not our strong suit.  But for a long time now, a
hundred years at least, the amount of change and information
that we have to deal with is growing exponentially.  This
leaves us with less time to contemplate our prospects, as
the article puts it.

The tools that have emerged in the last two decades haven't
helped this at all.  Instead of help us to cope with the
overload, we are simply given tools to wack up the overload
to eleven.  We are now encouraged to live and act and
communicate and make decisions in the moment, rather than
think things through first.  It started with email and
usenet.  Both were originally designed for UUCP store and
forward networks, not instant and always on.  So we started
using email as something that required immediate attention,
and for people to respond in like kind.  USENET was never
able to really make the leap so discussions moved to mailing
lists and then online forums.

The introduction of the iPhone changed it all again and
ratcheted up the speed.  People had already been using SMS
more and more as a replacement for both telephone calls, and
email.  AOL instant messenger was the early form of what was
to come.

Twitter made sms a broadcast medium -- a firehose that could
never be drunk without dedicating a serious amount of time
each day.  Tweets are the ultimate in knee jerk responses,
reducing all conversations to 140 character brain farts.
Twitter is designed to be a meme injector -- to spread a
meme as fast and far as possible, without giving anyone
enough time to catch their breadth, let alone figure out
what you might actually think about something before you are
pressured into responding.  The fact that Donald Trump uses
Twitter as his go-to place to vent and rant and spill the
beans speaks worlds for the platform.

Facebook came along and built their walled garden and did
things that even AOL hadn't done.  Facebook has all of the
immediacy of Twitter, but is organized around real life
social peer groups.  Those peer groups tend to push for
group conformity, and pressure for members to perform.
Facebook is designed around the same principle as casino
slot machines, by injecting posts from people that they
infer that they want to hear from and talk to at just the
right moment to keep people scrolling through their feed.
It has recently been revealed that they even sell
advertising that targets teenagers in specific states of
mind when they will be more suggestable to advertising
messages.  And advertising is no longer just selling
unhealthy beverages, snacks, footware and other consumer
flim flam, advertisers are now, as often or not groups
looking to influence political issues and elections.

The whole social media ecosystem is build around speed, and
not giving people enough time to think because you can make
more money when people react than when they think.

My takeaway from this is that we need to build tools to deal
with overload, and give us time for otium.  Social media is
negotium in the harshest sense of the word.  And we need to
learn to feel comfortable again with the vast majority of
our communications being asynchronous.  Teach people to use
IM only for what is immediately important -- not as a
shorthand means of communication and chat.

Chat is limited but useful -- and again should not be used
to conduct conversations that are more than a brief back and
forth to ask and answer a question in real time.

We need to take back email, and it's legacy as an electronic
analog to paper correpondance through the post.

Most comment threads are pointless and would be better
served by measured responses to papers and articles that
take place over days and weeks.

** What where when

I find it remarkable that our brains store what, where and
when in different parts of the brain.

#+begin_quote
Perhaps the most remarkable evidence comes from recent brain
imaging research. When recalling a past event, the
hippocampus must combine three distinct pieces of
information â€” what happened, when it happened and where it
happened â€” that are each stored in a different part of the
brain. Researchers have found that the same circuitry is
activated when people imagine a novel scene. Once again, the
hippocampus combines three kinds of records (what, when and
where), but this time it scrambles the information to create
something new.

-- [[https://mobile.nytimes.com/2017/05/19/opinion/sunday/why-the-future-is-always-on-your-mind.html?referer=https://t.co/OcAMCcjA2H][We Arenâ€™t Built to Live in the Moment]] | New York Times
#+end_quote

We reconstruct memories in different ways, in context with
what we know at the moment we recall things.

#+begin_quote
Episodic memory is widely conceived as a fundamentally
constructive, rather than reproductive, process that is
prone to various kinds of errors and illusions. With a view
towards examining the functions served by a constructive
episodic memory system, we consider recent
neuropsychological and neuroimaging studies indicating that
some types of memory distortions reflect the operation of
adaptive processes. An important function of a constructive
episodic memory is to allow individuals to simulate or
imagine future episodes, happenings and scenarios. Since the
future is not an exact repetition of the past, simulation of
future episodes requires a system that can draw on the past
in a manner that flexibly extracts and recombines elements
of previous experiences. Consistent with this constructive
episodic simulation hypothesis, we consider cognitive,
neuropsychological and neuroimaging evidence showing that
there is considerable overlap in the psychological and
neural processes involved in remembering the past and
imagining the future.

-- [[bib:schacter:2007cognitive][The cognitive neuroscience of constructive memory: remembering the past and
   imagining the future]] | Daniel L. Schacter (2007)
#+end_quote


** Fast and Slow

 - [[id:kahneman:2011thinking][Thinking, Fast and Slow]] | Daniel Kahneman (2011)


#+begin_quote
When you come late to the party, writing the 160th review,
you have a certain freedom to write something as much for
your own use as for other readers, confident that the review
will be at the bottom of the pile.

Kahneman's thesis is that the human animal is systematically
illogical. Not only do we mis-assess situations, but we do
so following fairly predictable patterns. Moreover, those
patterns are grounded in our primate ancestry.

The first observation, giving the title to the book, is that
eons of natural selection gave us the ability to make a fast
reaction to a novel situation. Survival depended on it. So,
if we hear an unnatural noise in the bushes, our tendency is
to run. Thinking slow, applying human logic, we might
reflect that it is probably Johnny coming back from the Girl
Scout camp across the river bringing cookies, and that
running might not be the best idea. However, fast thinking
is hardwired.

The first part of the book is dedicated to a description of
the two systems, the fast and slow system. Kahneman
introduces them in his first chapter as system one and
system two.

Chapter 2 talks about the human energy budget. Thinking is
metabolically expensive; 20 percent of our energy intake
goes to the brain. Moreover, despite what your teenager
tells you, dedicating energy to thinking about one thing
means that energy is not available for other things. Since
slow thinking is expensive, the body is programmed to avoid
it.

Chapter 3 expands on this notion of the lazy controller. We
don't invoke our slow thinking, system two machinery unless
it is needed. It is expensive. As an example, try
multiplying two two-digit numbers in your head while you are
running. You will inevitably slow down. NB: Kahneman uses
the example of multiplying two digit numbers in your head
quite frequently. Most readers don't know how to do
this. Check out "The Secrets of Mental Math" for
techniques. Kahneman and myself being slightly older guys,
we probably like to do it just to prove we still
can. Whistling past the graveyard - we know full well that
mental processes slow down after 65.

Chapter 4 - the associative machine - discusses the way the
brain is wired to automatically associate words with one
another and concepts with one another, and a new experience
with a recent experience. Think of it as the bananas vomit
chapter. Will you think of next time you see a banana?

Chapter 5 - cognitive ease. We are lazy. We don't solve the
right problem, we solve the easy problem.

Chapter 6 - norms, surprises, and causes. A recurrent theme
in the book is that although our brains do contain a
statistical algorithm, it is not very accurate. It does not
understand the normal distribution. We are inclined to
expect more regularity than actually exists in the world,
and we have poor intuition about the tail ends of the bell
curve. We have little intuition at all about non-Gaussian
distributions.

Chapter 7 - a machine for jumping to conclusions. He
introduces a recurrent example. A ball and bat together cost
$1.10. The bat costs one dollar more than the ball. How much
does the ball cost? System one, fast thinking, leaps out
with an answer which is wrong. It requires slow thinking to
come up with the right answer - and the instinct to distrust
your intuition.

Chapter 8 - how judgments happen. Drawing parallels across
domains. If Tom was as smart as he is tall, how smart would
he be?

Chapter 9 - answering an easier question. Some questions
have no easy answer. "How do you feel about yourself these
days?" Is harder to answer than "did you have a date last
week?" If the date question is asked first, it primes an
answer for the harder question.

Section 2 - heuristics and biases

Chapter 10 - the law of small numbers. In the realm of
statistics there is a law of large numbers. The larger the
sample size, the more accurate the statistical inference
from measuring them. Conversely, a small sample size can be
quite biased. I was in a study abroad program with 10 women,
three of them over six feet. Could I generalize about the
women in the University of Maryland student body?
Conversely, I was the only male among 11 students and the
only one over 60. Could they generalize anything from that?
In both cases, not much.

Chapter 11 - anchors. A irrelevant notion is a hard thing to
get rid of. For instance, the asking price of the house
should have nothing to do with its value, but it does
greatly influence bids.

Chapter 12 - the science of availability. If examples come
easily to mind, we are more inclined to believe the
statistic. If I know somebody who got mugged last year, and
you don't, my assessment of the rate of street crime will
probably be too high, and yours perhaps too low. Newspaper
headlines distort all of our thinking about the
probabilities of things like in and terrorist
attacks. Because we read about it, it is available.

Chapter 13 - availability, emotion and risk. Continuation.

Chapter 14 - Tom W's specialty. This is about the tendency
for stereotypes to override statistics. If half the students
in the University area education majors, and only a 10th of
a percent study mortuary science, the odds are overwhelming
that any individual student is an education
major. Nonetheless, if you ask about Tom W, a sallow gloomy
type of guy, people will ignore the statistics and guess he
is in mortuary science.

Chapter 15 - less is more. Linda is described as a very
intelligent and assertive woman. What are the odds she is a
business major? The odds that she is a feminist business
major? Despite the mathematical impossibility, most people
will think that the odds of the latter are greater than the
former.

Chapter 16 - causes trump statistics. The most important
aspect of this chapter is Bayesian analysis, which is so
much second nature to Kahneman that he doesn't even describe
it. The example he gives is a useful illustration.

  - 85% of the cabs in the city are green, and 15% are blue.
  - A witness identified the cab involved in a hit and run as blue.
  - The court tested the witness' reliability, and the
    witness was able to correctly identify the correct color
    80% of the time, and failed 20% of the time.

First, to go to the point. Given these numbers, most people
will assume that the cab in the accident was blue because of
the witness testimony. However, if we change the statement
of the problem so that there is a 20% chance that the blue
identification of the color was wrong, but 85% of the cabs
involved in accidents are green, people will overwhelmingly
say that the cab in the accident was a green madman. The
problems are mathematically identical but the opinion is
different.  Now the surprise. The correct answer is that
there is a 41% chance that the cab involved in the accident
was blue. Here's how we figure it out from Bayes theorem.

If the cab was blue, a 15% chance, and correctly identified,
an 80% chance, the combined probability is .15 * .8 = .12, a
12% chance If the cab was green, an 85% chance, and
incorrectly identified, a 20% chance, the combined
probability is .85 * .2 = .17, a 17% chance Since the cab
had to be either blue or green, the total probability of it
being identified as blue, whether right or wrong, is .12 +
.17 = .29. In other words, this witness could be expected to
identify the cab as blue 29% of the time whether she was
right or wrong.  The chances she was right are .12 out of
.29, or 41%. Recommend that you cut and paste this, because
Bayes theorem is cited fairly often, and is kind of hard to
understand. It may be simple for Kahneman, but it is not for
his average reader, I am sure.

Chapter 17 - regression to the mean. If I told you I got an
SAT score of 750 you could assume that I was smart, or that
I was lucky, or some combination. The average is only
around 500. The chances are little bit of both, and if I
take a test a second time I will get a lower score, not
because I am any stupider but because your first observation
of me wasn't exactly accurate. This is called regression to
the mean. It is not about the things you are measuring, it
is about the nature of measurement instruments. Don't
mistake luck for talent.

Chapter 18 - taming intuitive predictions. The probability
of the occurrence of an event which depends on a number of
prior events is the cumulative probability of all those
prior events. The probability of a smart grade school kid
becoming a Rhodes scholar is a cumulative probability of
passing a whole series of hurdles: studying hard, excelling
in high school, avoiding drink and drugs, parental support
and so on. The message in this chapter is that we tend to
overestimate our ability to project the future.

Part three - overconfidence

Chapter 19 - the illusion of understanding. Kahneman
introduces another potent concept, "what you see is all
there is," thereinafter WYSIATI. We make judgments on the
basis of the knowledge we have, and we are overconfident
about the predictive value of that observation. To repeat
their example, we see the tremendous success of Google. We
discount the many perils which could have totally derailed
the company along the way, including the venture capitalist
who could have bought it all for one million dollars but
thought the price was too steep.

Chapter 20 - The illusion of validity. Kahneman once again
anticipates a bit more statistical knowledge than his
readers are likely to have. The validity of a measure is the
degree to which an instrument measures what it purports to
measure. You could ask a question such as whether the SAT is
a valid measure of intelligence. The answer is, not really,
because performance on the SAT depends quite a bit on prior
education and previous exposure to standardized tests. You
could ask whether the SAT is a valid predictor of
performance in college. The answer there is that it is not
very good, but nonetheless it is the best available
predictor. It is valid enough because there is nothing
better. To get back to the point, we are inclined to assume
measurements are more valid than they are, in other words,
to overestimate our ability to predict based on
measurements.

Chapter 21 - intuitions versus formulas. The key anecdote
here is about a formula for predicting the quality of a
French wine vintage. The rule of thumb formula beat the best
French wine experts. Likewise, mathematical algorithms for
predicting college success are as least as successful, and
much cheaper, than long interviews with placement
specialists.

Chapter 22 - expert intuition, when can we trust it? The
short answer to this is, in situations in which prior
experience is quite germane to new situations and there is
some degree of predictability, and also an environment which
provides feedback so that the experts can validate their
predictions. He would trust the expert intuition of a
firefighter; there is some similarity among fires, and the
firemen learns quickly about his mistakes. He would not
trust the intuition of a psychiatrist, whose mistakes may
not show up for years.

Chapter 23 - the outside view. The key notion here is that
people within an institution, project, or any endeavor tend
to let their inside knowledge blind them to things an
outsider might see. We can be sure that most insiders in
Enron foresaw nothing but success. An outsider, having seen
more cases of off-balance-sheet accounting and the woes it
can cause, would have had a different prediction.

Chapter 24 - the engine of capitalism. This is a tour of
decision-making within the capitalist citadel. It should
destroy the notion that there are CEOs who are vastly above
average, and also the efficient markets theory. Nope. The
guys in charge often don't understand, and more important,
they are blind to their own lack of knowledge.

Part four - choices

This is a series of chapters about how people make decisions
involving money and risk. In most of the examples presented
there is a financially optimal alternative. Many people will
not find that alternative because of the way the problem is
cast and because of the exogenous factors. Those factors
include:

Marginal utility. Another thousand dollars is much less
important to a millionaire than a wage slave.

Chapter 26 - Prospect theory: The bias against loss. Losing
$1000 causes pain out of proportion to the pleasure of
winning $1000.

Chapter 27 - The endowment effect. I will not pay as much to
acquire something as I would demand if I already owned it
and were selling.

Chapter 28 - Bad Events. We will take unreasonable risk when
all the alternatives are bad. Pouring good money after bad,
the sunk cost effect, is an example.

Chapter 29 - The fourfold pattern. High risk, low risk, win,
lose. Human nature is to make choices which are not
mathematically optimal: buying lottery tickets and buying
unnecessary insurance.

Chapter 30 - rare events. Our minds are not structured to
assess the likelihood of rare events. We overestimate the
visible ones, such as tsunamis and terrorist attacks, and
ignore the ones of which we are unaware.

Chapter 31 - Risk policies. This is about systematizing our
acceptance of risk and making policies. As a policy, should
we buy insurance or not, recognizing that there are
instances in which we may override the policy. As a policy,
should we accept the supposedly lower risk of buying mutual
funds, even given the management fees?

Chapter 32 - keeping score. This is about letting the past
influence present decisions. The classic example is people
who refuse to sell for a loss, whether shares of stock or a
house.

Chapter 33 - reversals. We can let a little negative impact
a large positive. One cockroach in a crate of strawberries.

Chapter 34 - Frames and reality. How we state it. 90%
survival is more attractive than 10% mortality.

Part V. Two selves: Experience and memory

Our memory may be at odds with our experience at the
time. Mountain climbing or marathon running are sheer
torture at the time, but the memories are exquisite. We
remember episodes such as childbirth by the extreme of pain,
not the duration.

Lift decision: do we live life for the present experience,
or the anticipated memories? Are we hedonists, or
Japanese/German tourists photographing everything to better
enjoy the memories?

-- [[https://www.amazon.com/gp/customer-reviews/R3KHS6T5UE1HQG/ref=cm_cr_dp_d_rvw_ttl?ie=UTF8&ASIN=0374533555][Annotations on Kahneman's table of contents - a survey of
   logic and illogic]] (March 15, 2012)
#+end_quote



** Cognitive Limits

** References


