#   -*- mode: org; fill-column: 60 -*-

#+TITLE: Distributed Governance Introduction
#+STARTUP: showall
#+TOC: headlines 4
#+PROPERTY: filename

[[https://img.shields.io/badge/made%20by-Chenla%20Institute-999999.svg?style=flat-square]] 
[[https://img.shields.io/badge/class-w & w-56B4E9.svg?style=flat-square]]
[[https://img.shields.io/badge/type-work-0072B2.svg?style=flat-square]]
[[https://img.shields.io/badge/status-wip-D55E00.svg?style=flat-square]]
[[https://img.shields.io/badge/licence-MIT%2FCC%20BY--SA%204.0-000000.svg?style=flat-square]]

bibliography:~/proj/chenla/hoard/bib.bib

[[[../../index.org][top]]] [[[../index.org][up]]]

* Distributed Governance Introduction
:PROPERTIES:
:CUSTOM_ID:
:Name:     /home/deerpig/proj/chenla/warp/10/55/intro.org
:Created:  2018-05-06T11:04@Prek Leap (11.642600N-104.919210W)
:ID:       68fba307-fc90-40cb-9ecd-dc17bb096e2a
:VER:      578851511.959082123
:GEO:      48P-491193-1287029-15
:BXID:     proj:ONU8-2035
:Class:    primer
:Type:     work
:Status:   wip
:Licence:  MIT/CC BY-SA 4.0
:END:

** Scope

At the heart of goverance is discourse -- it might be one to
many discourse, in the case of a monarchy or many to one in
the case of a democracy.

But it is still a discourse.  Ah, you say, but a dictator,
by definition, dictates what he (they all seem to be men)
wants, where is the discourse?  They only can rule if they
have a group, even if it is a small group, who will do what
they are told, there is an underlying discourse happening in
even the most tyrannical regimes because the supreme leader
can only stay in power through the support of those who
follow them.  Keep rewarding your minions and you stay in
power.

In democracies and representive democracies the discourse
is, in theory transparent where the processes are open for
everyone to see.

Governance boils down to managing infrastructure for a
territory.  A territory can be either physical or
organizational or any combination in between, be anything
from a postage stamp collecting club, to a super-power
nation-state controlling a continent.

This is done by finding ways of getting everyone in that
territory to cooperate to maintain and run infrastructure
according to how governance prescribes.

Discourse is the process of taking information from
shareholders in the territory and determining what will or
will not be done about it.  In small groups, egalitarian
systems work well because the complexity of group dynamics
falls within human cognitive limits.  When the size of a
group exceeds those limits mechanisms need to be put into
place to allow such un-natural structures to work.  This is
when small groups of elites emerge to make descions on the
groups behalf.  More often than not, those descions are
based on the wants and needs of the elites and everyone else
get's a lesser share and ability to participate in the
discourse.

This means that large organizations benifit a few and are
tolerated or endured by the many.  But this is the only way
we can manage large organizations -- because we can only
work together in small groups, most people need to hand over
that process to the elites which are a proxy that makes a
large group undertandable within our cognitive limits.  The
elites are a substitute for that small egalitarian pack.

The takeaway from all of this is that large organizations
work, but only at the expense of most members of the
organization. 

Ideally, people should only need to interact with and
cooperate and control the immediate territory where they
live, and then your group need only to cooperate with other
groups to achieve larger goals that can't be carried out by
a small group.  There are a number of mechanisms that
achieve that.  There are many examples of small groups which
would come together for short periods of time to achieve
something collectively and then disband for the rest of the
year.  This has worked very well in many very diverse
cultures around the world over thousands of years.

What screwed this up was agriculture.  As soon as we stopped
being mobile, those temporary large organizations became
permanent and fixed.

I believe that in a post-scarcity civilization we can
leverage cognitive-machines and other technologies to
replace the work needed to manage and maintain most
infrastructure, and then we all can belong to small groups
who deal with the cooperation and coordination of daily
life.  Then, periodically groups will come together briefly
to make large scale collective descions, hand it over to the
slow-AIs managing the plumbing and then disband until the
next time something needs to be done.

There doesn't need to be any fixed organizational structure
like we have today in the nation-state system, so long as
all groups agree to a set of rules, rights and duties that
apply to everyone.  Since different things happen at
different rates of change, these temporary governments will
form at different intervals, some might only happen once a
century, others once a year.  Smaller groups of groups might
need to come together once a month.

This would be impossible to achieve without trustless
semi-autonomous systems that can't be corrupted without
everyone becoming aware of it.  Think of it as a sort of
distributed blockchain governance to manage autonomous
infrastructure.

If this would be a bottom up, generative system governed by
a complex mesh of self-learning negative feedback loops.

This approach, if we could ever find a way of designing,
building it and getting it to work, would be far better fit
with human nature and within our cognitive limits and
establish an egalitarian system of governance and
infrastructure that can scale from a couple, or even a girl
and her dog, up to a global civilization or even a
civilization that could span the solar system.


  - Overton Window

** TL;DR
** References




