#   -*- mode: org; fill-column: 60 -*-

#+TITLE: Estrangement
#+STARTUP: showall
#+TOC: headlines 4
#+PROPERTY: filename

[[https://img.shields.io/badge/made%20by-Chenla%20Institute-999999.svg?style=flat-square]] 
[[https://img.shields.io/badge/class-primer-56B4E9.svg?style=flat-square]]
[[https://img.shields.io/badge/type-work-0072B2.svg?style=flat-square]]
[[https://img.shields.io/badge/status-wip-D55E00.svg?style=flat-square]]
[[https://img.shields.io/badge/licence-MIT%2FCC%20BY--SA%204.0-000000.svg?style=flat-square]]

bibliography:~/proj/chenla/hoard/bib.bib

[[[../index.org][top]]] | [[[./index.org][index]]]

* Estrangement
:PROPERTIES:
:CUSTOM_ID:
:Name:     /home/deerpig/proj/chenla/warp/ww-estrangement.org
:Created:  2018-03-21T18:52@Prek Leap (11.642600N-104.919210W)
:ID:       20b34386-119b-40ba-b668-8a885192ca53
:VER:      574905186.480630274
:GEO:      48P-491193-1287029-15
:BXID:     proj:BWB2-1148
:Class:    primer
:Type:     work
:Status:   wip
:Licence:  MIT/CC BY-SA 4.0
:END:

** TL;DR

 - quality -- beauty    -- connectedness
 - caring  -- integrity -- control


Alexander's QWAN and Pirsig's Quality are framed by Olson at
that is that which we are estranged estranged from which is
most familar.

In different ways they seem to dump the estrangement at the
feet of Aristotle  ---

They all seem to agree that if we can get back what we lost,
that everything else will come together.  Of course this is
a old meme.  If we can just restore ourselves to what we
were in the Garden before Eve bit the apple, if we can
return to an agrarian utopian past that never existed etc.

But that's not what Alexander and Pirsig and Olson are
talking about here -- it's not returning to a romanticized
fictional past which never existed, it's finding the part of
ourselves that we left behind when man developed spoken
languages and then written languages and so on and so forth
-- at each stage we added layers of mediation between us and
the world to the point where we are disfunctional and deeply
unhappy.

I think they have the right idea -- it's not returning to
anything but reconnecting to what the world is, that we
can't see any longer.

There is a whole raft of different books that are focused on
the different aspects of what is missing, mastery, rest --
hell, epicurus was the first to get at the roots of the
problem so very long ago -- fear.  The stoics said to face
your fear and then it had no power -- epicurus wanted to
eliminate it so that you didn't have to face it.

I'm still not sure, but perhaps process philosophy is a good
fit here -- if everything is the present -- time is not a
line and there is no past or future, then there can be no
retribution or reward in an afterlife.  Though, actually PP
doesn't preclude heaven and hell, it would just be part of
the present, hmm... stick with epicurus on that.

I hope we can include the TEDTalk from the brain scientist
who had a stroke -- which presents the concept from a
biological AND personal perspective.

Her experience explains a lot -- that self-consciousness is
a brain function, and a very useful one.  If a living
organism can not differentiate itself from the rest of the
universe it can not function -- it becomes an
undifferentiated part of the continuum of the universe.  The
problem is that we have let it go to our heads (bad pun) and
have not kept a healthy balance between self and world, our
map is trapped in the delusion that it is the territory and
forgotten that we are also part of a territory far bigger
than ourselves...

Even worse, we have built up concentric layers of collective
maps around us to the point where we don't know what is
real and what isn't.

We need to reconnect to the world and find a balance between
being a part or being a part of a whole.


#+begin_comment
[2018-03-10 Sat] Tried to explain some of this to Mike
tonight when I was in Phnom Penh today, but I think he
didn't understand what I was trying to say.  I called it
mediation rather than explain map-territory.

Am I on the right track here?  I still think so.  But that's
the problem of working on this stuff for so long on my own,
I need more feedback to make sure I'm on track.
#+end_comment

** High Modernism

#+begin_quote
The grand schemes for improving the human condition that our
century has witnessed failed because of an error in their
perception of human knowledge. High modernists thought they
knew better than ordinary human beings how society
works. They aimed to replace the common understanding of
social life with scientific knowledge. But scientific
knowledge is too abstract to capture our understanding of
local circumstances -- the practical knowledge the ancient
Greeks called /metis/, which carried Odysseus though his
adventures. This is the knowledge that modern governments
ignored when they attempted to resettle peasant farmers in
newly constructed villages. It is the knowledge urban
planners lack when they try to construct cities according to
a simple, comprehensive design.

— [[https://archive.nytimes.com/www.nytimes.com/books/98/04/19/reviews/980419.19graylt.html][The Best-Laid Plans]] |  John Gray, NYT April 19, 1998
#+end_quote

I like his mention of Odysseus and metis -- because this is
exactly what Havelock claims Homer's works are, an cultural
encyclopedia for pre-literate Greek civilization that
contained most of the practical knowledge that the culture
wished to preserve and pass down from one generation to the
next.  According to Havelock, cite:havelock:1963preface this
is what Plato was railing against in his attack of Poetry.
So is this where the estrangement began?  I've been making
that arguement throughout my notes lately, and it seems to
bear up -- in moving from societies based collective
knowledged passed on to future generations spoken languages,
which were prone to high levels of copying errors, to
collective knowledge based written tradition that had far
fewer copying errors, and allowed people to move much of
that practical cultural knowledge from living memory into
written memory made rational thought, and the sciences to
advance in a way that would have been impossible otherwise.
Written languages are not simply extentions of long term
memory, they are extension of working memory, that allows to
offload information as it occurs to you while working out a
problem and then come back to it.  It makes iterative
processes possible by preserving the state of a work in
progress while working on a new iteration of that work, or
problem.

The rational and later the scientific revolutions were all
built on these foundations.  High Modernism as defined by
Scott is simply this process taken to it's ultimate
conclusion.  Scott and Pinker would argue that we've gone
too far and need to step back to the Enlightenment which
embraced man in all of his glory and folly -- understanding
and accepting our very human nature in this way isn't easy
because it forces us to come to grips with the fact that we
are hitting some hard edges of what Sapiens can and can not
do, and that we are not perfectible, we can never be perfect
rational creatures and to expect us to be is not only doomed
to failure but to invite existential disaster.  The whole
notion of perfectibility of apes who have barely emerged
from the Savannah is the height of hubris.

This is not to say that we can not overcome our cognitive
biases and limitations, but we're going to have to be a bit
more humble about how we go about it and know that
eventually improvements will hit a wall of diminishing
returns and Mankind will have to make a very hard descision
to stay human with our flaws in ways that we would still
recognize as being human today, or to move on to reengineer
ourselves to become something that we aren't today.

Do we want to take the road that Vulcan's did in the Star
Trek Universe and even go beyond what they had done to
engineer the emotional and irrational part of them who made
them who they were out of their subspecies?  Would even the
Vulcan's have the wisdom of knowing that it would be worth
what they would be giving up?

Thankfully these are not questions our generation or
hopefully many more generations in the future will have to
face. Let us hope that when the time comes, we make the
right descion, whatever that might be.

I wonder how much of the High Modernist concept of
perfectibility is just whitewashed Puritanism?  The unhinged
mania to scrub our sins from our souls so we may be worthy
of a cruel God's love, grace and salvation.  They do seem to
fit together rather well.  Suffering to achieve a perfection
that will be repaid a thousand fold in a promised utopian
afterlife that doesn't sound much better than the life they
were subjecting their mortal lives to.  No wonder Pinker
get's so much vitriol, I mean shit, they really don't like
what he's saying.  Do people have such self loathing that
they can't accept themselves for what they are, warts and
all, along with the capacity to also do so much more.  Why
isn't that enough?


** References

Enlightenment

  - Pinker, S., The blank slate: the modern denial of human
    nature (2003), : Penguin Books.
    cite:pinker:2003blank
  - Pinker, S., The better angels of our nature: why
    violence has declined (2012), : Penguin Books.
    cite:pinker:2012better-angels
  - Pinker, S., The cognitive niche: coevolution of
    intelligence, sociality, and language, Proceedings of
    the National Academy of Sciences, 107(Supplement 2),
    8993–8999 (2010).
    http://dx.doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0914630107
    cite:pinker:2010cognitive

  - Havelock, E. A., Preface to plato (history of the greek
    mind) (1963), : Harvard University Press.
    cite:havelock:1963preface

High Modernism

  - Saul, J. R., Voltaire's bastards: the dictatorship of
    reason in the west (1993), : Vintage.
    cite:saul:1993voltaires-bastards
  - Scott, J. C., Seeing like a state: how certain schemes
    to improve the human condition have failed (1998), :
    Yale University Press.
    cite:scott:1998seeing
  - [[http://calnewport.com/blog/2018/04/11/the-disturbing-high-modernism-of-silicon-valley/][The Disturbing High Modernism of Silicon Valley]] | Cal
    Newport 2018
  - [[https://archive.nytimes.com/www.nytimes.com/books/98/04/19/reviews/980419.19graylt.html][The Best-Laid Plans]] |  John Gray, NYT April 19, 1998


Alienation? 
  - [[https://aeon.co/essays/in-the-1950s-everybody-cool-was-a-little-alienated-what-changed][A History of Alienation]] | Aeon cite:jay:2018alienation
  - Marcuse, H., & Kellner, D., One-dimensional man :
    studies in the ideology of advanced industrial society
    (2002), : Routledge.
    cite:marcuse:2002one-dimensional
  - Pirsig, R. M., Zen and the art of motorcycle
    maintenance: an inquiry into values (2008), : Harper
    Perennial Modern Classics.
    cite:pirsig:2008zen
  - Mills, C. W., White collar: the american middle classes
    (1951), : Oxford University Press.
    cite:mills:1951white
  - Wikipedia, , /White collar: the american middle classes
    --- wikipedia, the free encyclopedia/ (2017).
    cite:wiki:2017white-collar-book
  - Wikipedia, , /Social alienation --- wikipedia, the free
    encyclopedia/ (2018).
    cite:wiki:2018social-alienation



  - https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Self-estrangement
  - https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Marx%27s_theory_of_alienation 

