#   -*- mode: org; fill-column: 60 -*-

#+TITLE: High Modernism
#+STARTUP: showall
#+TOC: headlines 4
#+PROPERTY: filename

[[https://img.shields.io/badge/made%20by-Chenla%20Institute-999999.svg?style=flat-square]] 
[[https://img.shields.io/badge/class-w & w-56B4E9.svg?style=flat-square]]
[[https://img.shields.io/badge/type-work-0072B2.svg?style=flat-square]]
[[https://img.shields.io/badge/status-wip-D55E00.svg?style=flat-square]]
[[https://img.shields.io/badge/licence-MIT%2FCC%20BY--SA%204.0-000000.svg?style=flat-square]]

bibliography:~/proj/chenla/hoard/bib.bib

[[[../index.org][top]]] | [[[./index.org][index]]]


* High Modernism
:PROPERTIES:
:CUSTOM_ID:
:Name:     /home/deerpig/proj/chenla/warp/01/04/ww-high-modernism.org
:Created:  2018-04-25T10:53@Prek Leap (11.642600N-104.919210W)
:ID:       c7d2915f-a83d-4b0b-8137-12726e144de0
:VER:      577900503.355876936
:GEO:      48P-491193-1287029-15
:BXID:     proj:IBU4-5630
:Class:    primer
:Type:     work
:Status:   wip
:Licence:  MIT/CC BY-SA 4.0
:END:

** TL;DR

High Modernism as pejorative per James Scott's definition



#+begin_quote
The grand schemes for improving the human condition that our century
has witnessed failed because of an error in their perception of human
knowledge. High modernists thought they knew better than ordinary
human beings how society works. They aimed to replace the common
understanding of social life with scientific knowledge. But scientific
knowledge is too abstract to capture our understanding of local
circumstances -- the practical knowledge the ancient Greeks called
/metis/, which carried Odysseus though his adventures. This is the
knowledge that modern governments ignored when they attempted to
resettle peasant farmers in newly constructed villages. It is the
knowledge urban planners lack when they try to construct cities
according to a simple, comprehensive design.

â€” [[https://archive.nytimes.com/www.nytimes.com/books/98/04/19/reviews/980419.19graylt.html][The Best-Laid Plans]] |  John Gray, NYT April 19, 1998
#+end_quote

I like his mention of Odysseus and metis -- because this is exactly
what Havelock claims Homer's works are, an cultural encyclopedia for
pre-literate Greek civilization that contained most of the practical
knowledge that the culture wished to preserve and pass down from one
generation to the next.  According to Havelock,
cite:havelock:1963preface this is what Plato was railing against in
his attack of Poetry.  So is this where the estrangement began?  I've
been making that arguement throughout my notes lately, and it seems to
bear up -- in moving from societies based collective knowledged passed
on to future generations spoken languages, which were prone to high
levels of copying errors, to collective knowledge based written
tradition that had far fewer copying errors, and allowed people to
move much of that practical cultural knowledge from living memory into
written memory made rational thought, and the sciences to advance in a
way that would have been impossible otherwise.  Written languages are
not simply extentions of long term memory, they are extension of
working memory, that allows to offload information as it occurs to you
while working out a problem and then come back to it.  It makes
iterative processes possible by preserving the state of a work in
progress while working on a new iteration of that work, or problem.

The rational and later the scientific revolutions were all built on
these foundations.  High Modernism as defined by Scott is simply this
process taken to it's ultimate conclusion.  Scott and Pinker would
argue that we've gone too far and need to step back to the
Enlightenment which embraced man in all of his glory and folly --
understanding and accepting our very human nature in this way isn't
easy because it forces us to come to grips with the fact that we are
hitting some hard edges of what Sapiens can and can not do, and that
we are not perfectible, we can never be perfect rational creatures and
to expect us to be is not only doomed to failure but to invite
existential disaster.  The whole notion of perfectibility of apes who
have barely emerged from the Savannah is the height of hubris.

This is not to say that we can not overcome our cognitive biases and
limitations, but we're going to have to be a bit more humble about how
we go about it and know that eventually improvements will hit a wall
of diminishing returns and Mankind will have to make a very hard
descision to stay human with our flaws in ways that we would still
recognize as being human today, or to move on to reengineer ourselves
to become something that we aren't today.

Do we want to take the road that Vulcan's did in the Star Trek
Universe and even go beyond what they had done to engineer the
emotional and irrational part of them who made them who they were out
of their subspecies?  Would even the Vulcan's have the wisdom of
knowing that it would be worth what they would be giving up?

Thankfully these are not questions our generation or hopefully many
more generations in the future will have to face. Let us hope that
when the time comes, we make the right descion, whatever that might
be.

I wonder how much of the High Modernist concept of perfectibility is
just whitewashed Puritanism?  The unhinged mania to scrub our sins
from our souls so we may be worthy of a cruel God's love, grace and
salvation.  They do seem to fit together rather well.  Suffering to
achieve a perfection that will be repaid a thousand fold in a promised
utopian afterlife that doesn't sound much better than the life they
were subjecting their mortal lives to.  No wonder Pinker get's so much
vitriol, I mean shit, they really don't like what he's saying.  Do
people have such self loathing that they can't accept themselves for
what they are, warts and all, along with the capacity to also do so
much more.  Why isn't that enough?

