#   -*- mode: org; fill-column: 60 -*-

#+TITLE: Civilis
#+STARTUP: showall
#+TOC: headlines 4
#+PROPERTY: filename

[[https://img.shields.io/badge/made%20by-Chenla%20Institute-999999.svg?style=flat-square]] 
[[https://img.shields.io/badge/class-primer-56B4E9.svg?style=flat-square]]
[[https://img.shields.io/badge/type-work-0072B2.svg?style=flat-square]]
[[https://img.shields.io/badge/status-wip-D55E00.svg?style=flat-square]]
[[https://img.shields.io/badge/licence-MIT%2FCC%20BY--SA%204.0-000000.svg?style=flat-square]]

bibliography:../hoard/bib.bib

* Civilis
:PROPERTIES:
:CUSTOM_ID:
:Name:     /home/deerpig/proj/chenla/warp/ww-civilization.org
:Created:  2018-03-29T09:15@Prek Leap (11.642600N-104.919210W)
:ID:       dcebab12-82b3-4757-834a-289a23414c58
:VER:      575561807.552927464
:GEO:      48P-491193-1287029-15
:BXID:     proj:IBK3-5173
:Class:    primer
:Type:     work
:Status:   wip
:Licence:  MIT/CC BY-SA 4.0
:END:

** TL;DR

There has been so much written about civilization, as
history, as a concept, what it says about what we are, the
heights of human achievements and the terrible depths that
we are guilty of and likely will be guilty of again and
again.  But this is not a history.  Whether we like it or
not, we as individuals and are a species are creatures of
this strange construction that we call civilization.  It
speaks to every part of who we are now, and whether or not
we are going to be around much longer or not.

I personally think that if we do survive and learn to thrive
rather than exterminating ourselves or overrunning the
carrying capacity of our environment and wipe ourselves out
by destroying the very thing that allows us to live in the
first place, the story that will be written will be how we
were civilized by civilization and became something far more
than a pack species that learned to scale and dominate the
entire planet.

Mankind is an experiment being played out by DNA on a grand
scale.  It is an experiement that holds out the
possibility of Life on Earth freeing itself from the random
hit and miss process of random mutation and natural
selection and becoming self-determinisitic.  Man can not
take credit for that, we are just one small part in a
process that has lasted at least three and a half billion
years.  Man is not the pinnacle of that process, and we are
not the end of it either.  Whether Man survives or thrives
is of no importance to the larger scheme of things.  We
might be bit players, but at this moment in time, we are the
keystone species on the planet with the potential of being
instrumental in the most momentous change since the
evolution of multi-celluar life.  Yes, it really is that big
a deal.  Life creates order from the one-way inevitibility
of entropy.  Entropy gives time a direction, it gives us
information, but it's ultimately a great winding down of
order, complexity, and beauty.  And entropy, just like
Darwinian natural selection is governed by random chance.
And because entropy only works in one direction, that
direction is relentlessly towards randomness, and anything
that that makes our universe unique or special or
interesting.

But if Life with a capital L, can escape that trap of
randomness and become not just self-organizing and
self-replicating but also self-directing -- that is an
astonishing counterforce against entropy and it's power over
the universe.  That all sounds very grand, when you consider
how small, short lived and fragile we are, as a species and
even all of Life combined.  But it's an astonishing thing to
contemplate.  And we are fortunate to be the first attempt
that life has made that is at the brink of being able to do
so.

And all of this hinges on our ability to get better at
civilizing ourselves and not destroying our own life support
systems or destroying ourselves becuase we can't rise above
the programing that evolution has given us and that has
gotten us to where we are today.




Civilization -> comes from the word civitis meaning city.
The ancient greeks used the word polis to mean city, but it
was also the closest thing they had to the concept of
civilization.  This is a good place to start as any and
grounds us at human scales.






** Table of Contents
  - 01. Definitions I. One or many?
  - 02. Definitions II. Historical
    - Ba Ba Ba: Us vs. the Other
    - A Clash of cultures, states, religions, or ideologies
    - A Parade of Great Men
    - Human Nature as Social Drivers
  - 03. Definitions III. Complex System
    - DNA's Grand Experiment 
    - Cerebral Cortex: Extended and Externalized 
    - Holarchy
      - Self-Organizing Holarchic Open System (SOHO)
      - Civilization is a sub-holon of the bios-layer 
    - A Fabric of Process
    - A Very Slow AI
  - 04. [[./ww-narrative-synopsis.org][A Narrative Synopsis]]
  - 05. Specialization
  - 06. Polis as Building Block
    - Of Nations and States
  - 07. Carrying Capacity
  - 08. Holding it together
    - propagation, linguistic, cultural
  - 09. Complex Societies as Systems
  - 10. Pace-Layer Model
    - *Bios Layer* :Civilizations have seldom been
      understood as being a layer that we inhabit in a
      larger biosphere -- that the ecosystem we belong to is
      as much a part of civilization as anything else.
      Pretty much everything written about civilization only
      talks about ecosystems in terms of resources -- as if
      resources were external to the system.  A civilization
      in the middle of an Ice Age will be very different
      from a civilization during an era with a clement
      climate.  It is not enough to only talk in terms of
      carrying capacity, but also climate patterns,
      biodiversity, how difficult or easy is it to extract
      raw materials from the lithosphere.
    - *Anthros Layer*
    - *Culture Layer*
    - *Governance Layer*
    - *Infrastructure Layer*
    - *Commerce Layer* 
    - *Fashion Layer* 
  - 11. Civilization As Generative Genome
  - 12. Cherry Picking: Towards Civilization From First Principles
    - All Things Apply To Everyone
    - Only Human Scales
    - Adjusting for Human Nature
    - More Eggs in More Baskets
    - Never Evenly Distributed
    - Rejoicing in Diversity
    - Embracing Uncertainty
    - Generative Plans, Designs, and Management 
    - One Step Forward, Two Steps Back


** Notes



#+begin_comment
Tainter argues that civilizations hit maximum complexity and
can't sustain itself -- rather civs max out their ability to
innovate and change the parameters of the petri dish -- they
hit the edge of the petri dish because they could not find a
way to grow.
#+end_comment

