#   -*- mode: org; fill-column: 60 -*-

#+TITLE: Polis
#+STARTUP: showall
#+TOC: headlines 4
#+PROPERTY: filename

[[https://img.shields.io/badge/made%20by-Chenla%20Institute-999999.svg?style=flat-square]] 
[[https://img.shields.io/badge/class-primer-56B4E9.svg?style=flat-square]]
[[https://img.shields.io/badge/type-work-0072B2.svg?style=flat-square]]
[[https://img.shields.io/badge/status-wip-D55E00.svg?style=flat-square]]
[[https://img.shields.io/badge/licence-MIT%2FCC%20BY--SA%204.0-000000.svg?style=flat-square]]

bibliography:../hoard/bib.bib

* Polis
:PROPERTIES:
:CUSTOM_ID:
:Name:     /home/deerpig/proj/chenla/warp/ww-polis.org
:Created:  2018-04-05T08:19@Prek Leap (11.642600N-104.919210W)
:ID:       6fb9e83c-4ab9-4857-afe3-5b0900daa8c2
:VER:      576163214.745875692
:GEO:      48P-491193-1287029-15
:BXID:     proj:YRY1-0838
:Class:    primer
:Type:     work
:Status:   wip
:Licence:  MIT/CC BY-SA 4.0
:END:

** TL;DR

The way that we organize information, matter and energy is
how we organize power.

We have already discussed how the concept of civilization is
rooted in the concept of cities, the polis, from where we
also get the word politics.

Now that we have a clear understanding of what a citizen is,
we can move from being a migratory or wandering
hunter-gatherer to a sedentary urbanite.  A band of
hunter-gatherers resolved conflicts by either moving or
fighting.  Urban Man makes moving difficult without
significant disruption and social and material loss.  So
urban Man needed to find ways of non-violently resolving
conflicts between neighbors -- from where we get words like
negotiation, which come from the word /negotium/, the
opposite of /otium/ which is a time of quiet contemplation.
Negotium encompused the social, the day to day business and
intercourse with her neighbors.

We need a model for the concept of polis as the atomic unit
of civilization as a physical and social fabric that makes
politics and commerce possible.

We will then discuss the relationship between the urban and
rural, as an economic relationship that creates tensions
because of the inequality between the two sides in terms of
wealth (urban areas have a higher concentration of wealth),
access to and quality of services, which we will see can be
understood as a problem of propagation of information,
wealth and logistics.

Finally we will look at mechanisms for how all of these
problems can be solved and how they have been solved in the
past.

In the end, as we have seen over and over, is that the
limiting factor for any of these solutions is scale.  Once
we move to scales larger than humans are designed for, we
see systemic problems emerge that can never be resolved
because the solutions simply don't scale.

** Table of Contents


HARD
  - rural, urban, cosmopolitan
  - ancient greek city-states
  - town-gown
    - polis and nones
  - monastic estates - familia intus & familia foris
    cite:horn:1979plan v1.p341
  - [[./ww-settlement-hierarchies.org][Settlement Hierarchies]]
  - Agora, Stoa & Pynx cite:sennett:2016pynx
  - Neighborhood and identity cite:hubka:1984big-house
WET
  - Social Structures
    - Nature
      - Mates
      - Hives, Colonies
      - Packs
      - Herds, Flocks, Schools 
    - Kinship
      - mated pair = couple - economic unit
      - pair + children = nuclear family
      - pair + children, and parents = extended family
      - band = base hunter-gather unit, human equiv of a pack
      - clan = band that are made up of members who are blood
        relations.
      - Barkota (polynesia)
    - Polities
      - chiefdom
      - tribe
      - nation
      - city-state
      - state
      - nation-state
    - Legitimacy -> claim to power
      - Sovereignty
      - Claim
        - Heredity
        - Divine (monarch or theocractic),
        - Populist or Fascist
        - Ideological (rule by isms)
        - Elected Representitive
      - Mandate
        - Force of Arms      -> least flexible
        - Populist Mandate   
        - Democratic Mandate -> most flexible
    - Corporate Structures
      - Cooperatives -> partnerships, clubs, etc
      - Corporations -> virtual person
      - States       -> sovereign groups

  - Proposed

    The goal here is to create the most flexible structure possible.

    - Person     -> Individual person (person is member of
                    Mankind), corporation. Has rights, but
                    no liability, equity or group membership
    - Citizen    -> Person who has rights, obligations and
                    equity in group.
    - Ward       -> Persons lacking cognitive ability for self
                    determination.
    - Union      -> legal collective between 2 or more Persons
    - Domus      -> Household/Workshop (typically a
                    corporate person) no larger than 40 Persons.
    - Guild      -> Corporate person, who can not hold
                    property, take part in poltical
                    activities but may have powers such as 
                    judicial, or security or credidation.
    - [[./ww-polis-nomes.org][Polis]]      -> (polis + nomes)
    - Federation -> group of polis and or guilds -- may be
                    permanent or for a project.  Do not have
                    same rights as a Polis (can not control 
                    territory) or other functions
                    that super powers hold today.

SOFT

   Basically this is what I'm calling MIDDLE, which makes up
   all of the automation that links all of the Hard and Wet
   parts of Polis together.

   To paraphrase Einstein, MIDDLE has to be as complicated as it
   needs to be but not more.

   MIDDLE is hardware (machines) and Software (cognitive and
   clockwork) that is meant to replace middlemen in the
   system, which reduces inefficiencies and opportunities
   for rent seeking, replaces slavery with sub-cognitive AI
   and clockwork processes.  The MIDDLE is especially
   designed to provide machine-cog that manages processes
   that are too fast and small or large and slow for humans
   to be able to do themselves.


** Sovereign Structures

Corporation + sovereignty = state

Sovereignty is typically justified by supernatural 

It is common for royals to claim that they hold their
positions by the authority of a deity, who backs up their
position with the force of that deity (in this life or the
next) -- with the implication that if you do not recognize
their authority you are challenging God.

This has morphed into moving authority from a deity to an
ethnic group with squatter rights.  That if you go against
the authority that lays claim to representing that ethnic,
religious or cultural group you are attacking everyone in
that group.

The enlightenment morphed this still further to define a
nation as a collection of any group with a shared national
identity that can participate in elections that choose
leaders.

In all cases, the benifits of property and wealth controlled
(owned) by a group self-propagates to the leaders.  This
self-propagation is an important concept because if people
are considered property, then the wealth that they produce
is owned by those who have control or claim ownership.

The reality of sovereignty is that the only thing that makes
it possible is if you can fight off any outsiders who want
to take it away from you.

This has morphed into the modern nation-state system where
instead of going to war, states support the claim of
sovereignty of their neighbors so long as they reciprocate.

The drawback of this system is that since WWII state borders
have largely been frozen which in recent years has been
coupled with a tendency of states to restrict migration of
people over state borders.  There are any number of
scenarios where this breaks down.  In the case of famine,
war or other calamities, people get dislocated.  In many
cases it that happens they are now trapped where they are
and face great hardship and often death.

The nation-state system could collapse if there is a
/perfect-storm/ of calamities that trigger mass migration of
people that will overwhelm state borders.  This is now
happening on a small scale in Europe with EU countries
stopping people from the middle east and north africa from
migrating to their countries.

Long term, if the EU doesn't actively work to solve those
problems, they will be responsible for the deaths of the
people who could have survived by going to the EU.

In the modern nation-state system nations are responsible
and liable for the well being of their neighbors.  When they
aren't, they are putting the peaceful nation-state system in
danger.


** References

  - Downing, F., & Hubka, T. C., Diagramming: a visual
    language, Perspectives in Vernacular Architecture, 2(),
    44–52 (1986).
    http://dx.doi.org/10.2307/3514315publisherJSTOR
    cite:downing:1986diagramming
  - Horn, W., Born, E., Jones, C. W., & Dupree, A. H., The
    plan of st. gall: a study of the architecture \& economy
    of, \& life in a paradigmatic carolingian monastery
    (1979), : University of California Press Berkeley, Los
    Angeles and London.
    cite:horn:1979plan v1.p341
  - Hubka, T., Big house, little house, back house, barn:
    the connected farm buildings of new england., , (),
    (1984).
    cite:hubka:1984big-house
  - Wikipedia, , /Settlement hierarchy --- wikipedia, the
    free encyclopedia/ (2018).
    cite:wiki:2018settlement-hierarchy
  - Sennett, R., The pnyx and the agora, In (Eds.),
    Designing Politics: the limits of design (pp. 6–9)
    (2016). : London School of Economics and Political
    Science.
    cite:sennett:2016pynx
