#   -*- mode: org; fill-column: 60 -*-

#+TITLE: 5. Estrangement Introduction
#+STARTUP: showall
#+TOC: headlines 4
#+PROPERTY: filename

[[https://img.shields.io/badge/made%20by-Chenla%20Institute-999999.svg?style=flat-square]] 
[[https://img.shields.io/badge/class-w & w-56B4E9.svg?style=flat-square]]
[[https://img.shields.io/badge/type-work-0072B2.svg?style=flat-square]]
[[https://img.shields.io/badge/status-wip-D55E00.svg?style=flat-square]]
[[https://img.shields.io/badge/licence-MIT%2FCC%20BY--SA%204.0-000000.svg?style=flat-square]]

bibliography:~/proj/chenla/hoard/bib.bib

[[[../../index.org][top]]] [[[./index.org][up]]]

* 5. Estrangement Introduction
:PROPERTIES:
:CUSTOM_ID:
:Name:     /home/deerpig/proj/chenla/warp/01/06/intro.org
:Created:  2018-03-21T18:52@Prek Leap (11.642600N-104.919210W)
:ID:       20b34386-119b-40ba-b668-8a885192ca53
:VER:      574905186.480630274
:GEO:      48P-491193-1287029-15
:BXID:     proj:BWB2-1148
:Class:    primer
:Type:     work
:Status:   wip
:Licence:  MIT/CC BY-SA 4.0
:END:

** Epigraph

#+begin_quote
"Man is estranged from that with which he is most familiar."

— Heraclitus
  as quoted in epigraph in Charles Olson's Special View of
  History (1956)
#+end_quote

** TL;DR

I once heard a pourquoi attributed to some Natve-American
tribe which I can't track down that described the origin
story of Dog.  That originally man was one with all the
animals.  And then one day, the earth cracked and began to
break in two, with man on one side and all the other animals
on the other.  And as the rift grew between the two, at the
very last moment, Dog jumped over and stood beside man.

That splt was framed as SPACE in all of it's manifestations.
As physical distance, as time, and the difference between
worldviews held by different people and cultures.  But most
of all, space is nature, what the Mongolians speak of as the
great blue sky, which encompassed the complete enormity of
the cosmos, under which all of us lived.  Even the different
religions were all considered on their own merits and
embrased as individuals saw fit.  There was no conflict in
this, because all religions too, were subsets of the Eternal 
Blue Sky,

#+begin_quote
[Genghis Kahn] created an international law and recognized
the ultimate supreme law of the Eternal Blue Sky over all
people.

For the Mongols, the one God was the Eternal Blue Sky that
stretched from horizon to horizon in all four
directions. God presided over the whole earth; he could not
be cooped up in a house of stone like a prisoner or a caged
animal, nor, as the city people claimed, could his words be
captured and confined inside the covers of a book.

They worshiped the Eternal Blue Sky, the Golden Light of the
Sun, and the myriad spiritual forces of nature. The Mongols
divided the natural world into two parts, the earth and the
sky. Just as the human soul was contained not in the
stationary parts of the body but in the moving essences of
blood, breath, and aroma, so, too, the soul of the earth was
contained in its moving water. The rivers flowed through the
earth like the blood through the body...

The Mongols continued, by a different means, to pursue their
compulsive goal of uniting all people under the Eternal Blue
Sky.

— cite:weatherford:2005genghis-khan
#+end_quote



Olson wrote of Ahab in Moby-Dick:

#+begin_quote
This Ahab had gone wild.  The object of his attention was
something unconscionably big and white.  He had become a
specialist: he had all spae concentrated into the form of a
white whale called Moby-Dick.  And he asailed it as Comumbus
an Ocean, LaSalle a continent, the Donner Party their winter
pass.

— Call me Ishmael p12 (1949)
  cite:olson:1997collected-prose
#+end_quote

and on the same page, just before:

#+begin_quote
Some men ride on such space, others have to fasten
themselves to it like a tent stake to survive.  As I see it
Poe dug in and Meville Mounted. They are the alternatives.

Americans still fancy themselves such democrates.  But their
triumphs are of the machine.  It is the only master of space
the average person ever knows, oxwheel to piston, muscle to
jet.  It gives trajectory.

To Melville it was not the will to be free but the will to
overwhelm nature that lies at the bottom of us as
individuals and a people.  Ahab is no democrat.  Moby-Dick,
antagonist, is only king of natural force, resource.
#+end_quote

For Olson, America was all about SPACE, writ large and still
so alien to a people and culture having been packed together
like sardines for centuries in the old countries.  European
space had been crammed inside each person, where there was
no where to escape.  At the time Melville was writing
Moby-Dick the foundations for the industrial revolution were
being cemented in place, brick by baked-red brick, switching
from casks of hunted whale-oil to pipelines of natural gas,
from capricious winds pushing sails to a head of steam that
remained steady so long as there was coal to stoak the
boilers.  Capricious sputtering nature wasn't dominated so
much as replaced by controlled flows turned on or off at
will.

Space was no longer anything that could be anchored to, it
was now outside and could be ignored.  Space was roofed over
or enclosed in rail and motor cars, vibrations and noise
absorbed, the winter winds canceled out by flows of heat,
the hammering summer sun by air conditioning.  The enormity
of space and the uncertainty of nature hammered flat, by
systems that were out of sight and mind, leaving us all
alone together with little to battle but each other.

Grant Morrison summed it up describing his black comedy Happy!

#+begin_quote
It’s a really simple story, but it condenses every other
story I’ve done… it’s All-Star Superman, it’s got all of
those things, because it ultimately says “Okay, we
acknowledge the world is a nihilistic hellhole plunging
toward screaming entropy, BUT... we have hope.” And right
now, when people are getting really freaked out and things
are seeming quite dystopian and out of control, and spinning
even further out of control, hope is reduced to this tiny
little unicorn. In some of my other stories, it’s been
Superman and it’s been the Justice League or it’s been
something, but right now it’s so down to nothing, it’s the
tiniest last little candle flame.

— Grant Morrison on, Happy! (2017)
#+end_quote

Man had always experienced space as all encompassing
vastness which took every ounce of our ingenuity and
strength to survive. But we had managed to lock it out of
the cocoons we built around us.  We had always felt somehow
lost in all that space bearing down on us -- and for a time
we had convinced ourselves that we had conquered it with our
flows and believed that the resources they came from
bottomless.

Deep inside we always knew it was a lie.  It never felt
right, though we could never quite put our finger on what it
was that was wrong.  We had forgotten.  We had lost our
connection to the wind, rain, heat, cold and hunger.  Sheets
of glass, reinforced concrete and buttressed girders had
created an industrial pocket universe; our universe of
flows.  The outside, nature and everything we had strove to
conquer was still there but we no longer believed we were
part of.  All agency had been reduced to the inside of of
the material bubbles in which we had enclosed outselves.

There is no returning to Ahab's world, and we wouldn't like
it if we did.  Life was brutal, short, uncertain and filled
with monotony, ignorance, pain and death.  The past held no
golden age, neither as paleolithic hunter-gatherers
wandering the earth, nor were there pastoral agrarian
utopias.  Giving birth was to risk your life, surgery was
conducted at breakneck speed as patients screamed, strapped
to tables.  Surviving childhood was little better than a
game of russian roulette.  The black death and smallpox
wiped out 80% of human civilization on two continents in the
blink of an eye.

There was never a heroic age, only entropy, wearing away the
lives of mortal men and women, eating away the detail, and
polishing them into protagonists and antagonists of stories
told around the camp fire, keeping our mind's off the things
that would do us harm, lurking in the darkness just beyond
the flickering compass of the fire's light and warmth.  We
want those stories to be true, both the happy and the
horrible because it's the details that makes us miserable.
The mosquito's buzz and bites that won't let you sleep.  The
hang-over and infected slash you got in a drunken brawl that
you don't want to admit to yourself was your fault.  The
whispered exagerations of minor sleights, and lost face.
It's easier to think that none of that happened in the
stories of old.

And with each retelling, we convince ourselves that they
reflect nobility and selfless bravery and heroic deeds that
have been lost in our time, when the only thing that was
lost was daily toil and discomfort dominating the hours and
days and years as they pass.

But for those of us alive today, the reverse is true, we are
living in an age of unriviled safety, comfort and wealth
that our heroic ancestors would have thought to be
impossible.

Subjectively it doesn't feel that way, but since 1800 the
human condition has dramatically improved in every category
that can be documented.  Lifespan has doubled, war, poverty,
sickness, murder have all declined by orders of magnitude
and will likely continue to decline at the same rate.  You
can argue until blue in the face of a long list of
atrocities, mistreatment, racism and greed, but every year
they are becoming the exception that proves the rule.

So what gives?  How can things be so good, and still feel
like they are coming apart at the seams?  Again, Olson got
it when he said "logic and classification has led
civilization towards man and away from space."  Space and
time collapse the faster that change propagates.  A murder
in Sioux City, might as well have happened down the block
from where you are eating dinner in Phnom Penh.  It's old
world europe all over again, but this time it's the entire
planet, and there are now over seven billion of us all
packed close enough together to feel their breath on the
back of your neck.  We've managed to escape space, and then
demolish it, squeezing out all of nature and all of space
and leaving nothing but ourselves.

The thing is that both narratives are true, both our wealth
and misery.  And all the material progress since 1800 has
come at a terrible price that we have yet to pay.  The
resources we use, and waste recklessly discarded, the horror
of the reality of industrial agricultural production that is
destroying the soil, the water and the air, not to mention
the horrors visited on the animals we eat.

All flows come from somewhere and go somewhere else, but all
we see is our place in the middle.  We can't see where the
flows begin, or where the waste flows to.  They are all lost
in space that we can no longer see and no longer believe we
are part of.  That is modern man's great folly.

In the 1950's Olson believed that man had become estranged
from his true nature.  But he also believed that there was a
way forward, a way for us as individuals and societies to
regain the space that we no longer see.  Seventy years later
there is no evidence that this is happening, but I believe
that the opportunity for us to be able to do do is fast
approaching if only we are strong enough to take it.


But the window is short, fifty years at best before the
flows start to dry up at their origin and back up from where
they are flowing to.

xxxxx framed the situation as two opposing worldviews, that
of prophets on one side, and wizards on the other.  The
wizards have ferreted out the secrets of nature and how to
leverage it to create the flows and the bubbles we live in
and that whatever runs dry can be replaced, what ever is
broken fixed as if the resources they are using are
bottomless.  The prophets only see the fact that the flows
are finite and that we must stop inflicting the damage we
are causing.






----------

velocity and volume of change was increasing now, the corner
shop and the morning market morphed into supermarkets whole
aisles of shelves dedicated to a single thing, 15 meters of
salty snacks, with 30 types of potato chips, three meters
dedicated to 25 types of ranch salad dressing alone -- all
coordinated and scientifically colored to scream at you,
blues and purples and reds and yellows all tugging at
different parts of your limbic system.

In 197x Toffler put a name to it, /future shock/, a few
pages in the financial pages of a daily newspaper increased
to narrow ticker tape a flow of cryptic codes for companies
and numbers going up and down at a steady rate throughout
the trading day.  Incoming news overwhelmed the dailies and
was consolidated by centralized agencies with names like
Reuters, Associated Press and xxxxx who increased flows
through endless scrolls of paper flowing from teletypes in
news rooms, an endless chatter of dot matrix text from each
agency that required teams to cut up and sort into
categories to be sent to specialized teams to be filter and
figure out not only as the NYT said, all the news that's fit
to print, but all the news that they could fit into any
given print run.

By 19xx the shock had worn off, leaving people with a
feeling of dread, Wurman put a name to it, /information
anxiety/ the fear that we were missing things that were
important that we couldn't keep up, couldn't cope with the
bombardment of paper and growing channels of radio and
television, and whole new categories of superstores
dedicated to selling musical recordings, and yet others
dedicated to renting video cassettes, and this was still a
few years before the Internet, came into people's lives in
the form of the world wide web, invented to bring under
control the explosion of scientific and technical journal
preprints which was making it impossible for scientists to
keep up on what was developing and who was working on which
problem.  The web was quickly adopted by the general public
who also initially greeted it with relief.  Surely the
computer would allow us to consolidate and filter and bring
some kind of order to the madness.  But it was only
amplified, turning the torrents of information being
generated by professionals into a Cambrian explosion as
everyone connected changed from being prey to predator, from
consuming, to producing.

The flows had far outstripped the ability of any human
cognitive capacity to cope with, and anyone who attempted it
was said to be drinking from the fire hose.  The shock which
had turned into anxiety was now leaving us numb and
helpless.  The steady flows that had collapsed space were
now compressing it until it was becoming nothing more than
white noise flowing right through us.  Welcome to the
information age, where everyone is so busy producing that
there is no more time to listen, let alone contemplate or
comprehend -- it's all now just /the feed/ an endless stream
that is engineered to be addictive rather than informative,
impelling you to interact and react, but it's all now just
garbage in, and all of us are the result of Pavlovian
conditioning to keep pulling the leaver and hypnotically
dropping coins into the slot and occasionally being rewarded
with a box delivered to your door from amazon.  We are now
all part of an ecosystem of maximized flows that follow your
around beeping, and vibrating, demanding attention demanding
you keep pulling the lever so much that it never leaves your
hand -- it becomes the windows that you see the world
through -- and you can never look up from.  There is no time
to even talk to the people you work with, or eating with --
only occasionally lifting the thing long enough to take a
picture and send it before you've had a chance to process
what you've seen, and only experience what you've seen from
the replies from others of your experience.  We have been
reduced to zombie processes, mechanically feeding and
consuming from flows and occasionally being jolted into
outrage and palitable acts of cruelty only possible in the
heat of the certainty of the moment, a mob nation of zombies
brandishing tiki-torches.

This was the price paid when as the machine moved us away
from forgotten space and then to man who has transformed
into part and parcel of mindless flows that had originally
been the instrument that had lifted man up from the messy
and dangerous uncertainty of nature and replaced it with the
illusion of constant movement, constant change through
homogeneous flow of information and matter and energy which
has lost all context -- because all space has collapsed on
into ourselves and left us alone, afraid and yearning for
something that we no longer have the agency to experience
even though all that would take would be to look up from the
device and see that it's still all there, all around us --
all that space had never been conquered or vanquished.  The
labyrinth in all it's splendor and beautiful and complexity
spreads out around us in all directions with no center, no
direction or even purpose.  The universe it just there, to
ride wild and free or to nail down and confront, if we can
only let go of the flowing threads that have been leading us
towards something we can never reach.



** Notes

#+begin_comment

I'm going to take a different tack here and frame
estrangement as Olson did in Call Me Ishmael:

   "logic and classification has led civilization towards
    man and away from space."

for olson that's what it all boiled down to moving towards
man and away from space -- which is the universe, this is
where the breach began as a crack with the invention of
written language and widened into a canyon by the industrial
revolution with us on one side and the nature/space on the
other and then somehow in the last 15-20 years poof! man has
split himself into a pocket universe that pulls from the
real universe and then shits back whatever it can't use back
into it -- but then hey, that's not us, it's another
universe. right?


 - quality -- beauty    -- connectedness
 - caring  -- integrity -- control


Alexander's QWAN and Pirsig's Quality are framed by Olson at
that is that which we are estranged estranged from which is
most familar.

In different ways they seem to dump the estrangement at the
feet of Aristotle  ---

They all seem to agree that if we can get back what we lost,
that everything else will come together.  Of course this is
a old meme.  If we can just restore ourselves to what we
were in the Garden before Eve bit the apple, if we can
return to an agrarian utopian past that never existed etc.

But that's not what Alexander and Pirsig and Olson are
talking about here -- it's not returning to a romanticized
fictional past which never existed, it's finding the part of
ourselves that we left behind when man developed spoken
languages and then written languages and so on and so forth
-- at each stage we added layers of mediation between us and
the world to the point where we are disfunctional and deeply
unhappy.

I think they have the right idea -- it's not returning to
anything but reconnecting to what the world is, that we
can't see any longer.

There is a whole raft of different books that are focused on
the different aspects of what is missing, mastery, rest --
hell, epicurus was the first to get at the roots of the
problem so very long ago -- fear.  The stoics said to face
your fear and then it had no power -- epicurus wanted to
eliminate it so that you didn't have to face it.

I'm still not sure, but perhaps process philosophy is a good
fit here -- if everything is the present -- time is not a
line and there is no past or future, then there can be no
retribution or reward in an afterlife.  Though, actually PP
doesn't preclude heaven and hell, it would just be part of
the present, hmm... stick with epicurus on that.

I hope we can include the TEDTalk from the brain scientist
who had a stroke -- which presents the concept from a
biological AND personal perspective.

Her experience explains a lot -- that self-consciousness is
a brain function, and a very useful one.  If a living
organism can not differentiate itself from the rest of the
universe it can not function -- it becomes an
undifferentiated part of the continuum of the universe.  The
problem is that we have let it go to our heads (bad pun) and
have not kept a healthy balance between self and world, our
map is trapped in the delusion that it is the territory and
forgotten that we are also part of a territory far bigger
than ourselves...

Even worse, we have built up concentric layers of collective
maps around us to the point where we don't know what is
real and what isn't.

We need to reconnect to the world and find a balance between
being a part or being a part of a whole.
#+end_comment


#+begin_comment
[2018-03-10 Sat] Tried to explain some of this to Mike
tonight when I was in Phnom Penh today, but I think he
didn't understand what I was trying to say.  I called it
mediation rather than explain map-territory.

Am I on the right track here?  I still think so.  But that's
the problem of working on this stuff for so long on my own,
I need more feedback to make sure I'm on track.
#+end_comment



** References

Mongols

   - Weatherford, J., Genghis khan and the making of the
     modern world (2005), : Broadway Books.
     cite:weatherford:2005genghis-khan


Enlightenment

  - Pinker, S., The blank slate: the modern denial of human
    nature (2003), : Penguin Books.
    cite:pinker:2003blank
  - Pinker, S., The better angels of our nature: why
    violence has declined (2012), : Penguin Books.
    cite:pinker:2012better-angels
  - Pinker, S., The cognitive niche: coevolution of
    intelligence, sociality, and language, Proceedings of
    the National Academy of Sciences, 107(Supplement 2),
    8993–8999 (2010).
    http://dx.doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0914630107
    cite:pinker:2010cognitive

  - Havelock, E. A., Preface to plato (history of the greek
    mind) (1963), : Harvard University Press.
    cite:havelock:1963preface



Alienation? 
  - [[https://aeon.co/essays/in-the-1950s-everybody-cool-was-a-little-alienated-what-changed][A History of Alienation]] | Aeon cite:jay:2018alienation
  - Marcuse, H., & Kellner, D., One-dimensional man :
    studies in the ideology of advanced industrial society
    (2002), : Routledge.
    cite:marcuse:2002one-dimensional
  - Pirsig, R. M., Zen and the art of motorcycle
    maintenance: an inquiry into values (2008), : Harper
    Perennial Modern Classics.
    cite:pirsig:2008zen
  - Mills, C. W., White collar: the american middle classes
    (1951), : Oxford University Press.
    cite:mills:1951white
  - Wikipedia, , /White collar: the american middle classes
    --- wikipedia, the free encyclopedia/ (2017).
    cite:wiki:2017white-collar-book
  - Wikipedia, , /Social alienation --- wikipedia, the free
    encyclopedia/ (2018).
    cite:wiki:2018social-alienation



  - https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Self-estrangement
  - https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Marx%27s_theory_of_alienation 

