#   -*- mode: org; fill-column: 60 -*-

#+TITLE: Hoard
#+STARTUP: showall
#+TOC: headlines 4
#+PROPERTY: filename

[[https://img.shields.io/badge/made%20by-Chenla%20Institute-999999.svg?style=flat-square]] 
[[https://img.shields.io/badge/class-w & w-56B4E9.svg?style=flat-square]]
[[https://img.shields.io/badge/type-work-0072B2.svg?style=flat-square]]
[[https://img.shields.io/badge/status-wip-D55E00.svg?style=flat-square]]
[[https://img.shields.io/badge/licence-MIT%2FCC%20BY--SA%204.0-000000.svg?style=flat-square]]

bibliography:~/proj/chenla/hoard/bib.bib

[[[../index.org][top]]] | [[[./index.org][index]]]

* Hoard
:PROPERTIES:
:CUSTOM_ID:
:Name:     /home/deerpig/proj/chenla/warp/ww-hoard.org
:Created:  2018-04-10T11:07@Prek Leap (11.642600N-104.919210W)
:ID:       09b5e459-d2fa-4dfb-960c-b4ec8681b40d
:VER:      576605306.452670201
:GEO:      48P-491193-1287029-15
:BXID:     proj:WCY4-7366
:Class:    primer
:Type:     work
:Status:   wip
:Licence:  MIT/CC BY-SA 4.0
:END:

** Table of Contents
  - Introduction
  - Global Attributes
    - Level of Detail
    - Pace/Shearing-Layer
    - Succession Stage
    - Expression-Level Entities
  - Hoard Structure
  - Metastructures
    - origin
    - calendar
    - curriculum
    - regime
    - ruleset
    - pattern
    - imports -> ARC
    - local inputs -> outside ARC
  - Skein
    - interfaces (formats & GUIs)
    - threads 
    - level completion
  - Code Base
    - operating-system
    - core languages
    - core applications
    - libraries  
  - Build
    based on continious releases processes
    - Configuration
    - Make
    - Make Deploy (local deploy)
    - Make Propagate (global deploy)
    - Rollback

** TL;DR

The Hoard, is not meant for use by end-users.  The Hoard is
a collection of different source-code repositories that pull
in patterns, parameters, theses, and keystones that have
been adapted to build a specific Primer meant for a specific
use-case for a specific individual or group, at a specific
level of development in a specific place, environment and
climate.

The Hoard is both dna and the rna (code) for the running
processes that make up a civilization -- when you deploy a
hoard you are triggering a process that will attempt at
building a civilization according to the hoard's DNA.

You use a primer to build a hoard -- when it's ready, you
deploy.  A hoard is not static, it is constantly being added
to, fixed and changed -- so it uses a continious deployment
model where you are constantly rolling out changes in real
time.  This means that if you fuck up, you can roll back
changes.  It also means that changes are incremental, so
that there is time for change to propagate and burn in to
the institutions and people using them.

Deployment is not global -- change deploys at the smallest
possible scope and then propagates -- this is a safeguard
but it also can't be avoided because civilizations are
distributed systems.  It also means that you can test things
on subsets of the civilization, perhaps even do A:B testing
before it propagates.

But I also want to stress that there is no master hoard for
a civilization.  There will be thousands if not millions of
hoards that make it up -- different things will change in
different places and as those changes propagate, they might
well come into conflict with each other and, like when the
fauna of north america came into contact with the fauna of
south america, you'll get two different species that fill
the same ecological niche.  One will inevitably die out to
be replaced by the other.  The trick is, how this will work
without the system fracturing.  At the core of the entire
system is that conflicts must be resolved without forking
the network.  I think that will be our greatest challenge.

The system is not designed to be homogeneous, locally there
might be any number of differences between the local here
and the local in another place.  Again, as it should be.

I think that the key here will be to ensure that the
different p-layers have the authority to do their job, and
ensure that systemic change is slow -- that competing ideas
can cooexist for as long as it takes for a concensus to take
place and for one to win out over the other.

The problem of peaceful propagation is going to keep me
awake many a night...

A lot of these notes above will be moved to propagation
section in w&w.


#+begin_quote
With great power, comes great responsibility.

— Uncle Ben
#+end_quote

#+begin_quote
Trust but verify.

— Ronald Reagan
#+end_quote

We need to design hoards so that users start at the
appropriate stage and then unlock other stages as they
progress -- so in a way this works like levels in a computer
game.  The thing is, that unlocking a level doesn't take you
to a new place, it just expands on where you already are.

We can think of a hoard as being a book where different
information is accessible depending on the user.  Different
content will be available to different users at different
stages.

In the development stage everything is unlocked.  When the
Hoard is deployed (released) the permission model kicks in
and you can only see everything if you have super-user
privileges.

Super Users can see everything all at once, or use a
God-Mode where they can /play/ the hoard, but are
automatically granted access and write access to everything.

For end-users, access to each stage can be fine-grained as
well, so that students can access it in one way, and
masters, another.

There is a whole deployment framework, so that the designers
can create this whole succession stage system.  Unlocking
and duck tests to determine if someone is ready for the next
stage will be a challenge.  It may not only be cryptographic
locking, it might well be physical.  So, let's say that the
last stage can only be unlocked by building a device that
can send a signal to the moon, and a slow AI on the moon
listening for that signal will then unlock it and allow
downloads.

I think that the hoard is where we can start to get into a
lot of ideas that Suarez explored in Daemon
cite:suarez:2009daemon -- leveraging mythos as both a
cognitive model, and an interface.

There are a lot of parallels here with both the unix
filesystem and computer/console games.  They have to be
woven in with the identity model, governance and a raft of
other things.

** Hoard

Every Hoard begin with an origin story and a curriculum --
not all Primers will cover as large a canvas as all of
civilization, so scale your LOD to the scope of what your
Hoard will cover.

** Origin Story
  - Filters

  - 1. The Big Bang
  - 2. Stars Light Up
  - 3. New Chemical Elements
  - 4. Earth and the Solar System

  - Life
  - 5. Life on Earth
  - 6. Collective Learning
  - 7. Agricuture
  - 8. The Modern Revolution

The origin story is the first part of the primer,[fn:1]
followed by the theses (declarations), then education (triv,
quad, laurea etc), then the shops and guilds, then the
value-chain, then bioregions, and finally production.

Man started out just as any other animal on the savannah,
but development of tools, then speech and finally writing
resulted in an estrangement that in our minds that estranged
us from the world and who we were that seemed to have
started with Aristotle and all of those god damned lists and
categories.  It wasn't until the Copernican Revolution which
showed that there was nothing special about where we were in
the universe that we began the slow process of decentering.
The Darwinian Revolution was the second decentering which
taught us that we are just one more creature in a vast
fabric of life and that all of the rules apply to all of us,
we are no exception. I believe that we are at the brink of a
third which will teach us that our minds and our
intelligence is nothing special either.  We've fallen a long
way and we are still falling.  And as anyone who has jumped
out of an airplane could tell you, the fall is nothing to be
afraid of, it's when the ground breaks your fall that you
have to worry about. Intelligence is all around us, we are
simply too caught up in ourselves to notice.  I hope that
when Man does hit bottom that it will leave us humbled and
capable of living within the limits of the ecosystems that
we are part of.  That doesn't mean we will stop hacking them
and shaping them for our own purposes, but it will have to
be with an understanding that we either find a way of living
within the carrying capacity of where we live, or we die.
You can not increase carrying capacity by using up or
abusing resources faster than they can be replaced.  If you
can hack nature to increase sustainible carrying capacity
great -- but that is not what Man is doing now.

  - social contract   
  - origin
  - theses
  - education
  - shops & guilds
  - value-chain
  - 
  - bioregions/ecosystems
  - production & surpluses

    - slavery/mass labour -> machinery -> cognitive machines



** Succession Model

The Succession model is designed so that Primers can be
generated to work at specific technological and sociel
levels of development.

Giving someone lessons in quantum mechanics and CAD files
for building a molten salt battery is not going to be of
much help to someone who is trying to survive in a
post-collapse survival scenario.

For this reason Primers are designed for five different
succession stages:

  - Survival 
  - Tools 
  - Clockwork
  - Electric
  - Cognitive

Each stage is designed to build on the foundation of the
stage before it.  Because of this, you can't jump from a
Tool Stage directly to the Electric State beause you will
not have the industrial infrasructure, knowledge or
experience to be able to do so.

In fact, we expect that in many cases, people today will
have to refer back to many things in earlier stages because
a lot of knowledge has been lost of how to do mahy things
less than inustrial scales.

This will be the first big challenge for our present
civilizaton, to take centralized massive scale industrial
processes and adapting them to smaller distributed
production systems that are part of a fine-grained supply
and production chain that works as efficiently at small
scales as our present system can only do at massive scales.

Another requirement will be for all stages to be able to
gracefully degrade.  In the event of a collapse, a cognitive
stage region who has suffered a catastrophe should be able
to revert without too much hardship to a lower stage of
production and existence either temporaily or for protracted
periods of time.  So each stage must be reversible.  A
washing machine that runs at the Cognitive Stage must be
able to degrade as far back as to the Clockwork stage and
still be functional until infrastructure is restored.

For this to work, all designs and production must produce
things that are durable, use-repairable, up-gradeable and
down-gradeable.

*** Survival

This stage could actually be designed to work in two broad
scenarios.  We will not decide which or if both of these
scenarios will be supported.

The first scenario is to provide instructions on rebuilding
a civilization that has collapsed.  In Lewis Dartnell's
book, /The Knowledge/ he lays out the initial conditions:

#+begin_quote
Of course, even in one of the extreme doomsday scenarios,
groups of survivors would not need to become self-sufficient
immediately. If the great majority of the population
succumbed to an aggressive virus, there would still be vast
resources left behind. The supermarkets would remain stocked
with plentiful food, and you could pick up a fine new set of
designer clothes from the deserted department stores or
liberate from the showroom the sports car you’ve always
dreamed about. Find an abandoned mansion, and with a little
foraging it wouldn’t be too hard to salvage some mobile
diesel generators to keep the lighting, heating, and
appliances running.  Underground lakes of fuel remain
beneath gas stations, sufficient to keep your new home and
car functioning for a significant period. In fact, small
groups of survivors could probably live pretty comfortably
in the immediate aftermath of the Fall. For a while,
civilization could coast on its own momentum. The survivors
would find themselves surrounded by a wealth of resources
there for the taking: a bountiful Garden of Eden.  

But the Garden is rotting.  

Food, clothes, medicines, machinery, and other technology
inexorably decompose, decay, deteriorate, and degrade over
time. The survivors are provided with nothing more than a
grace period. With the collapse of civilization and the
sudden arrest of key processes— gathering raw materials,
refining and manufacturing, transportation and
distribution—the hourglass is inverted and the sand steadily
drains away. The remnants provide nothing more than a safety
buffer to ease the transition to the moment when harvesting
and manufacturing must begin anew.

— cite:dartnell:2014knowledge

#+end_quote

All sorts of other assumptions can also be made of
survivors.  We can expect them to be literate, have a basic,
if tenuous grasp of basic classical mechanics and physics
and tools (though not as many as one would expect or even
hope).  All sorts of raw materials including metals and even
plastics can be recovered and recycled.  It's far easier to
melt down a pile of aluminium cans and recast the aluminium
for other purposes.  It's extremely difficult to find
bauxite deposits, refine the ore into alumina and get
aluminum that can be used to make things.  Less than two
hundred years ago, despite bauxite being one of the most
plentiful and easily mined minerals on the planet,
aluminimum was far more expensive than gold or platinum
because of the enormous energy and chemical requirements to
refine aluminimum.

The second scenario is to provide a second survival level
Primer for those who don't stumble across a copy of a Primer
for hundreds or even thousands of years, long after our
industrial civilization has rotted and decayed into
scattered remnants of ruins and relics.  Their path is many
orders of magnitude longer and more difficult than survivors
rebuilding from a recent collapse.

I believe, as does Dartnell, that it's more prudent to
provide a starting point for recent surviors, as a practical
matter of urgency, since this is a far more likely and
immediate scenario we may have to contend with.

#+begin_comment
I want to expand this and explore both in more detail,
including things that can be done to help jumpstart from
scratch -- by leaving caches of raw materials or other
approaches that could get them off the ground sooner.  Such
caches need to be hidden, and forgotten unless there is such
a long term collapse and will only be found by reading the
from-scratch Primer -- that means that the Primer must not be
accessable to anyone unless there has been a collapse that
has lasted hundreds or thousands of years.  It's an
interesting problem.
#+end_comment

So let's look a each of the five stages in turn:

*** Tools
hand tools, wind, water, and domesticed plants & animals.

The tool-stage assumes that complex machines and industrial
proccesses have been destroyed or can not be operated or
function and all there is are people, hopefully some animals
and basic hand tools.  This is essentially a pre-industrial
level of civilization.

The key here is to always look to jump start things to
shorten this stage in any way possible.

We will have knowledge that pre-industrial man didn't have
-- knowledge of sanitation, viruses, medicine, and optics.
We will know the basics of the periodic table and the uses
for different types of materials far in advance and in far
pure forms than they did.

A lot of things were not possible in pre-industrial times
because of impure materials and very low tolerances.  Steam
and internal combustion engines need high tolerance very
precise machining.  Even a mechanical watch required a level
of precsion that only handful of people were capable of for
moe than a hundred years after it's invention.

We know far more about the nutrient needs of sustainable
agriculture, food processing and preservation, and labor
saving devices than they did.

So it is possible to build a pre-idustrial village or town
from the wreckage of an industrial collapse that would be
far better than our ancestors at that stage of technology.

*** Clockwork 
enlightened edwardian civilization

Edwardian England was an interesting time. Many technologies
that had been invented during the Victorian era had begun to
mature, and the fruits of the scientific revolution had
begun to trickle down into the day to day lives of the
average person.

Edwardian England was the true beginning of the age of the
machines that were powered by steam.  There will still any
number of advances that still made life at that time
dreadful, medicine was more an art than based on any real
science.  Biology was still largely a mystery and basic
questions about how the universe worked had been discovered
but were still being debated.  But a great deal was possible
if you had the right kind of knowledge.

I see the clockwork stage as being a transitional stage
between tools and the electric stage, because clockwork can
be run on any power source and electricity is far more
flexible than steam.  But the integrated circuit had yet to
be invented and machines needed to be controlled using
complex mechanical clockwork which would all be miniturized
by electronics.

The edwardian age is when all mechanical devices were
electrified.  It was a magical transition that brought the
industrial revolution up to steam, so to speak.

But machines still were largely single purpose and had to be
operated by people pull levers and still doing a lot of
manual labour.  Cybernetic devices were single purpose,
complex, difficult to build and easily broke down.

All of this would change with the invention of the
integrated circuit.

*** Electronic
electrified & electronic enlightened edwardian

After World War II, the development of the integrated
curcuit ushered in the electronic era.  Electronics, where
machines could me miniturized from room sized clanking
monsters to something that could hum quietly on a table top.

Single purpose computational devices like the pocket
calculator became possible, the transistor radio, and radios
and steros moved from hot and somewhat fragile vacuum tubes
to circuit boards.

All of this required the machines that had been built in the
tool and then clockwork stages and then electrified -- but
now we had the ability to control them in far more flexible,
powerful ways. 

*** Cognitive
cognitive machines, robotics, bio & nano-tech

The computer revolution, which will soon be known as the
cognitive-machine revolution took the transistor and
miniturized it while at the same time increasing the number
of transistors on a circuit from dozens to millions.

This made possible general purpose computational machines
that could be programed using codes written by people and
then fed into the machine which would execute the
instructions.

This is just getting up to where we are today.

These systems are now becoming capable of performing simple
cognitive functions which allow them to do complex jobs with
little or no human supervision, or participation.  There is
a growing consensus that these systems are on the verge of
being able to replace a very large range of jobs that have
required humans to operate machinery.

At the same time, these computational tools have made it
possible to unlock and directly manipulate DNA -- so that we
will soon be able to design organisms and adapt genomes in
any way we see fit. 

And as if this isn't enough, advances in material sciences
are allowing us to create composite materials that are not
seen in nature and allow us to build things that would have
been thought impossible thirty years ago.

Space flight, which has been possble for nearly a hundred
years, but was handicapped by institutional and political
layers of crud are now being replaced by a handful of
private companies who are poised at turning spaceflight into
something closer to airlines, than chartered launch
services.  At present there are less than 1,500 satellites
orbiting the planet.  This month a licence was granted to a
company to launch over 2,500 new satellites that will have
to be launched in the next six years.  And these first 2,500
satellites are only the first wave of a deployment of more
than 11,000 in total.  And all of this this is being done by
only one company with no government financial support.  That
same company plans on putting the first people on Mars by
the middle of the next decade and a million people within 50
years after that.

The changes from any one of these revolutions would have as
great an impact as the printing press, or steam or the
transistor.  But we are now experiencing three to four
revolutions of this magnitude all happening at the same
time.  The changes that we will see over the next twenty
years will dwarf all of the changes that mankind has
experiences in the past 10,000 years.

This is the world and the civilization that is just starting
to emerge from these revolutions that we will need to guide
and shape.  We will need frameworks like APPL/Hoard and
Primer to adapt to these changes as quickly as they are
taking place.


** Footnotes

[fn:1] What about language?  Origins lays out our history which is
tells what our metaphysics and physics.  The nuts and bolts of laguage
will be in the Triv.  but I'm talking about something deeper, more
structural -- language both spoken, written and executable -- a
language of the long now that will change far slower than language at
the upper pace layers -- it will change, but over centuries and
milennia not years and decades.  It should be something that is stable
for long periods of time.  Different pace-layers will have different
versions of it, the fashion layer tries out new ideas which are
filtered and refined until they change the lowest layers.




