#   -*- mode: org; fill-column: 60 -*-
#+STARTUP: showall
#+TITLE:   APPL Prototype Patterns Contents
#+LINK: pdf   pdfview:~/proj/chenla/hoard/lib/

[[https://img.shields.io/badge/made%20by-Chenla%20Institute-999999.svg?style=flat-square]] 
[[https://img.shields.io/badge/class-w & w-56B4E9.svg?style=flat-square]]
[[https://img.shields.io/badge/entity-TOC-0072B2.svg?style=flat-square]]
[[https://img.shields.io/badge/status-wip-D55E00.svg?style=flat-square]]
[[https://img.shields.io/badge/licence-MIT%2FCC%20BY--SA%204.0-000000.svg?style=flat-square]]

bibliography:~/proj/chenla/hoard/bib.bib

[[[../../index.org][top]]] [[[../index.org][up]]]

* APPL Prototype Patterns Contents
  :PROPERTIES:
  :CUSTOM_ID:
  :Name:      /home/deerpig/proj/chenla/warp/proto/index.org
  :Created:   2018-09-11T08:39@Prek Leap (11.642600N-104.919210W)
  :ID:        584e8cf7-98e2-446a-a4b0-b970969549c1
  :VER:       589902024.668915974
  :GEO:       48P-491193-1287029-15
  :BXID:      proj:XEN1-1557
  :Class:     primer
  :Entity:    toc
  :Status:    wip 
  :Licence:   MIT/CC BY-SA 4.0
  :END:



  - Lifetime Pattern Language

    - General Character
    - Birth
    - Early Years
    - Childhood
    - Adolescence
    - Education/Apprenticeship
    - Journeyman
    - Marriage
    - Children
    - Master
    - Sabbatical
    - Second Master
    - Retirement
    - Final Years
    - Death


  - Education
    - Tree Planting Ceremony (hardwoods for when you become master)
      the trees planted will be harvested two generations later, the
      trees harvested when becoming a master were planted two years
      before.

    - Trivium
    - Laurea
    - Apprentice and complete Laurea
    - Join Domus Cluster -- Bamboo Planting Ceremony
    - Journeyman
    - Make starter House from bamboo
    - Join Shop
    
    - Leave Shop
    - Master
      harvest upgrade house and   


** Domus Cluster General Character

A cluster of 12 houses with 3-5 primary shops which might be a
storefront, a workshop, office, and 5 or more secondary shops that are
run as seasonal and or part time work.  The cluster shares a common
power grid, potable water, sewage and ideally a transportation pool.
Each cluster provides daycare and preschool for children (until the
age of 11 when children begin taking the Trivium).

#+begin_quote
The cluster is, in essence, a group of a dozen families, legally
constituted as a non--profit corporation. For the first fifteen years
of the cluster's life, the members of the cluster, the builder, and
the sponsor are financially and legally interdependent. During this
period the title to the land is held in trust. At the end of fifteen
years, the contracts are complete; the title of the land is
transferred from the trust to the cluster itself: and the cluster
becomes fully independent.

Physically, a cluster will contain about twelve houses, on about an
acre of land. Neither the density nor the size are absolutely
critical. A similar cluster might be built at twice the density or
half the density, for twice as many houses, or half as many, or even
less. However, we consider a cluster of about a dozen houses as a
basic unit, because it is an entity large enough to maintain itself as
an identifiable social group, yet small enough to be able to maintain
communication on a personal basis. A dozen families can sit around a
table and discuss and resolve their own affairs and problems fairly
easily. More cannot.

— — cite:alexander:1973grass-roots
#+end_quote

** Housing for Guests & Journeymen Vistors 

Each cluster will provide journeyman apartments for outside staff,
journeyman etc.

Each house is called a domus which is a multigenerationl so that any
one domus might have any combination of children, adolescents,
masters, retired/sabbatical and elderly individuals, couples and
families.  Houses are designed to grow and adapt over time as
different members of the house hold join, leave or raise children, or
retire.

** Common Property

Clusters consolidate tools and other things that are only used
occasionally, so it will be common for a cluster to have a workshop,
and food processing and preservation kitchen that anyone can use, a
walk-in fridge for storing cluster produce and meat, drying, smoking
and grain store -- a day care center, a community garden, perhaps even
a swiming pool.  There will be areas that can be used for large events
like weddings, funerals, holiday parties and for holding regular
communal meals.  There will be cluster owned cooking equipment, a PA,
Sound system, stage, plates, dishes, pots, pans, jumbo rice cookers
etc.

** Cluster Forest

Each cluster should have a forest, with a mix of hardwoods and quick
growing bamboo and pioneer spieces that will hold plantings for
specific people in the cluster that mark birth, graduation from
laurea, and death.  These trees and bamboo will act as sort of saving
banks for everyone in the community.  For urban clusters, these food
forests might be located outside the urban area, but also act as a
retreat with a pond or lakefront housing to recompress from urban life
and recharge.

** Sister Clusters

Every rural cluster should have a sister cluster in an urban area and
every rural cluster should have a sister cluster in an urban area.
Some people are content to live their entire lives in either an urban
or rural environment, but mankind's earliest form of civilization was
a cross between sedentary and nomadic.  During certain seasons people
foraged, or managed flocks or hunted and then came together to form ad
hoc settlements sometimes for brief periods, or perhaps a whole
season.  Many of the problems of the sedentary life of the farmer or
city dweller is that it cuts us off from that we need to remain
healthy, both psychologically, physically and socially.  Isolation
breeds ignorance and fear of outsiders.  Urban life is stressful and
intensive, with too little contact with nature or space to relax,
think and play.  A combination of both is important for all people.
This pattern should provide the ability for rural people to become
metropolitan and ideally cosmopolitan and for metropolitan people keep
grounded and feel their connectedness with the world outside of the
things of man -- the immensity of the land, the sky and the stars.
This pattern is one possible solution to the town-gown problem.

Another possibility is that clusters are linked at the busines and
production level as well.  If the rural cluster grows food it can
supply it's sister, but also it's sister can sell on their behalf --
so it becomes a value chain.  Now, if we add say two other sister
relationships with other clusters we could end up with and end-to-end
supply and production chain.  Then AI systems can coordinate,
schedule, provide logistics, manage accounts and transactions etc so
that there is no need for any one cluster to build up a bureaucracy or
administrative layer or for any one of the clusters to become
middlemen that control choke points in the chain.
      
** Link Identity to Cluster

The breakdown of the extended familily into the Nuclear family social
structure in the 20th century resulted couples and children that they
had more autonomy and mobility -- that was made possible by the
education of women and lowering of child mortality which result in
birth rates to lower to 2.5 or lower.  But it also meant that when
children left home to form nuclear families in new homes that there
was no extended family to help care for children -- this was one
factor in American suburbanization -- As Paul Graham said, suburbs
only exist for raising children and as the cost of housing and living
increased having a two paycheck household became a necessary norm
rather than an exception.  So school systems were scaled up and turned
into day care for children so that parents could work.  This fractured
the family even more as schools separated children from their families
so long that children cultures emerged to fill the void.  Children
belonged to their own subculture, which revolved around school and
adults had their own subculture that revolved around the workplace --
with a brief period of time when the two worlds had to live with each
other in the evenings and briefly in the morning.  Parents whose
children had moved out, and who subsequently retired found themselves
cut off both from interaction with their children and the culture of
the workplace.  On the positive side -- traditionally when women
married and moved in to their husband's house they fell under the
control of their new mother-in-law who were established as matriarchs
within the household.  This reinforced the extended family as a social
unit, but at the cost of women marrying into the family and for boys
who were not the eldest and would take over the family home and or
business were under intense pressure to remain living physically close
to their mothers.  This was a contributing factor in why many people
never traveling even a moderate distance from where they were born
even once in their lifetime.

There are any number of examples throughout history of variations and
alternates to extended families.  The New England neighborhood in the
18th and 19th centuries -- the Kibutz in Isreal, the Barcotta in
Philippines and Polynesian culture.

The cluster has the potential of being a social unit -- in fact this
must happen for the communial property aspect of the concept to work.
People have to share deeper relationships than proximity between each
other.  This means that work, child care, and recreation must overlap
to some extent.  And because up to two thirds of people living in a
cluster may not be working full time, there are many opportunities for
say, retiress or others working part time and studing something new to
help with child care and with prechool education.  When a parent dies,
or divorces there is a social and economic support system in place.
      
Because everyone in a cluster has an equity stake in the cluster and
can sell their share and have someone else move into the cluster there
is social structure and security.

So there is the possibility that the cluster can become a sort of
hybrid social structure that takes the best of different family and
social models and combines them.  Even better is that this is no one
social structure that a cluster has to adapt -- the members can pick
and choose what works for them and then tweak and change it over time.
      
** Building Clusters

Will largely follow the model outlined in Alexander's /Grassroots
Houseing/ concept paper.  A master builder is hired as architect and
builder to work with residents to build all structures on the
property.

#+begin_quote
The cluster is a group of ten or twelve families, legally constituted
as a non--profit corporation. The families will design their own
houses, and help to build them if they want to; and together they will
design and build the common areas between the houses. The houses will
grow rather slowly -- it will take at least five years for a house to
reach its full size; but the houses will be made in such a way that
people can live in them from the very beginning. In return for monthly
payments, and without a down payment, the families will own their
houses, and will be able to sell them, when they leave, for 90% of the
payments which they have made.

The builder is a non--profit foundation, which helps the group of
families design the public land between the houses, supervises all
construction on the site, provides instruction for those families who
wish to build for themselves, controls the monthly payments from the
families, handles the seed money needed to start other similar
clusters, and in later years, as the cluster reaches maturity, helps
the families and the cluster diagnose those deficiencies in their
surroundings which need to be repaired by new construction.

— cite:alexander:1973grass-roots
#+end_quote

