#   -*- mode: org; fill-column: 60 -*-

#+TITLE: X. Lingua Franca Introduction
#+STARTUP: showall
#+TOC: headlines 4
#+PROPERTY: filename

[[https://img.shields.io/badge/made%20by-Chenla%20Institute-999999.svg?style=flat-square]] 
[[https://img.shields.io/badge/class-primer-56B4E9.svg?style=flat-square]]
[[https://img.shields.io/badge/type-work-0072B2.svg?style=flat-square]]
[[https://img.shields.io/badge/status-wip-D55E00.svg?style=flat-square]]
[[https://img.shields.io/badge/licence-MIT%2FCC%20BY--SA%204.0-000000.svg?style=flat-square]]

bibliography:~/proj/chenla/hoard/bib.bib

[[[../index.org][top]]] [[[./index.org][up]]]

* X. Lingua Franca Introduction
:PROPERTIES:
:CUSTOM_ID:
:Name:     /home/deerpig/proj/chenla/warp/10/intro.org
:Created:  2018-04-27T09:49@Prek Leap (11.642600N-104.919210W)
:ID:       7fa6dfa4-4ac3-4730-b9ac-2e58851d5103
:VER:      578069424.218391470
:GEO:      48P-491193-1287029-15
:BXID:     proj:JXG0-6014
:Class:    primer
:Type:     work
:Status:   wip
:Licence:  MIT/CC BY-SA 4.0
:END:

** Scope

Mythos is the foundation for languages -- you can't have one
without the other. Lingua francas are always based on
networks and in particular empires which are more or less,
networks.

** TL;DR

#+begin_quote
1 And the whole earth was of one language, and of one speech.

2 And it came to pass, as they journeyed from the east, that
  they found a plain in the land of Shinar; and they dwelt
  there.

3 And they said one to another, Go to, let us make brick,
  and burn them throughly. And they had brick for stone, and
  slime had they for morter.

4 And they said, Go to, let us build us a city and a tower,
  whose top may reach unto heaven; and let us make us a name,
  lest we be scattered abroad upon the face of the whole
  earth.

5 And the Lord came down to see the city and the tower,
  which the children of men builded.

6 And the Lord said, Behold, the people is one, and they
  have all one language; and this they begin to do: and now
  nothing will be restrained from them, which they have
  imagined to do.

7 Go to, let us go down, and there confound their language,
  that they may not understand one another's speech.

8 So the Lord scattered them abroad from thence upon the
  face of all the earth: and they left off to build the city.

9 Therefore is the name of it called Babel; because the Lord
  did there confound the language of all the earth: and from
  thence did the Lord scatter them abroad upon the face of all
  the earth.

— Genesis 11:1–9, King James Version
  https://en.wikisource.org/wiki/Bible_(King_James)/Genesis#11
#+end_quote


On the face of it, the story of the Tower of Babel is a
pourquoi, providing a backstory for why there are so many
different human languages.  The story has always captured
people's imagination, if for no other reason that in the
story, God is not so much punishing Man, but making a
premptive strike against Man, who had eaten from the tree of
knowledge and was then ejected from the Garden.  In stopping
construction of the Tower God shows that what he was scared
of most was what Man would do with that knowledge --
cooperate.  And by cooperating Man collectively would be
able to challenge God.  The implication is that the source
of God's power is knowledge.  

We can only push the analogy so far.  Why would God put the
tree of knowledge in the Garden in the first place?  Then,
he gave the serpent access to the tree and to Adam and Eve.
This runs counter to a monothesitic plotline but rather
shows the polytheism and animisism that were part of belief
systems that the Hebrews built on, and the Christians built
on top of that.  Religions are bottom up systems that are
built one on top of each other.  This is the only way you
can gain converts, by adopting things from what people
already believe.  It works, but it just get's increasingly
more messy as each layer is built on top of the other.

Science has found a far better method, where the newer
layers are later understood to be more refined versions of
what came before.  The triumph of science over traditional
religious systems is that it maintains backward
compatibility instead of claiming that each iteration of
the story is a consistent world model that came directly
from a god's mouth.

The serpent was later recast as a fallen angel rebelling
against God.  An odd thing for an angel, who has no free
will (which was only granted to Man) to be able to do.  And
if God is the ultimate incarnation of good, power and grace,
what was he rebelling against in the first place?  But then,
the marriage of the old and new testements that the
Christians have tried to do was always a messy affair and
not thought through.  That messiness has been exploited over
the past two thousand years to cherry pick what any
particular person wants to hear and claim their
interpretation as correct.  And the christian bible is such
a contradictory mashup that it has had universal appeal to
the full spectrum of humanity, from the most depraved to
true heros and saints.  This explains Christianity's success
-- it's a ink blot test where people can see themselves
reflected back as a vindication for the good or evil that
they perpetrate..

By fragmenting a single common language into many, it would
make the type of cooperation needed to challenge God's
knowledge and power impossible.

This fits well with the Christian concept of time as
unwinding since The Fall, because at Babel God showed his
hand and that he was actively putting barriers in Man's way
after ejection from the Garden.  So in a sense, Babel
becomes a pourquoi story that explains entropy as a process
guided by God's hand. The Enlightenment turned this on it's
head and introduced the vision of time as progress and Man's
progression from savagery to
civilization. cite:thompson:1978darkness

The ability for us to progress is directly proportionate to
how well we can cooperate with each other, and cooperation
is founded on communication.  For all the richness, beauty
and variety of the spectrum of different human languages,
there is no getting around that mankind's greatest
achievements throughout history were made when there there
were lingua francas, often in the form of second languages,
such as Greek, Arabic, Latin and Mandarin which were used to
bridge communication between different cultures, speed the
propagation of information including news, scientific
discovery and even religious belief systems.  All of the
major monotheistic religeons were held together for most of
their history because of the continuity of a common language
over several millennia.  In this sense, the lingua franca
minimized the introduction of errors through translation.
Since each language is build on a cultural mythos,
translating a sacred text to a different language inevitably
introduces subtle shifts of meaning, no matter how careful
the translator attempts to stay true to the original text.
Once you change the surrounding context of something, you
change the meaning as well.


What all of this boils down to is propagation of
information, maintaining a common cultural context which
makes communication without misunderstanding possible.

The functional requirements for a distributed civilization:

  - a common origin story --> big history
  - a common language     --> lingua franca (typically as a
                              second language)
  - the common language must change at different rates in
    different pace-layers
  - a machine understanable incantation language
  - a shamanistic API which allows the creation of different
    incantation languages which are domain and/or cultural
    specific.
  - the API and Incantation languages must be able to
    gracefully degrade backwards and forwards across
    succession stages.
 
This takes care of many problems with drift and continuity
so long as propagation rates of information do not exceed
whatever the parameter for holding things together.  For the
type of civilization we are envisioning at the top
succession layer, this will likely be a day.

American and British English was in the process of becoming
separate languages, which stopped in the 20th century with
the introduction of mass communication -- epecially video,
audio and long distance telephony and later the Internet.

The flip side to this, is that by bringing the world
together into a single sphere of near instant communication,
we will see that languages will increasingly borrow words
into local languges from around the world.  This is already
happening.  It means that if the global language is English,
English will become more and more internationalized, rather
than being based largely on American English.  American
English will soon be just one more local varient of English.


The dark side of most Lingua Francas is that they have
largely been used as tools of oppression, of empire,
imperialism and as a tool of cultural genocide.  This is not
a thing of the past, it's happening today on a grand scale.

Lingua francas and their little siblings, pidgin languages
are the foundation for cross cultural and economic trade.

Lingua franca's are an important part of any state to make
it's people legible.cite:scott:1998seeing


There has been no small amount of ink spilled on the tragedy
of the death of a language.

But when all is said and done, the advantages of people
having a common language for governance, trade, science and
learning, even if that common language is a second one.
There are any number of countries where to be considered
literate one had to have mastered their mother tongue as
well as a second language spoken regionally or even
globally.



** References

  - Gordin, M. D., Scientific babel: how science was done
    before and after global english (2015), : University Of
    Chicago Press.
    cite:gordin:2015scientific-babel
  - Nye, M. J., /Speaking in tongues: science’s
    centuries-long hunt for a common language/ (2016).
    cite:nye:2016speaking-tongues
  - Jenkins, J., Global englishes: a resource book for
    students (2014), : Routledge.
    cite:jenkins:2014global-english
  - Horobin, S., How english became english: a short history
    of a global language (2015), : Oxford University Press.
    cite:horobin:2015how_english
  - Northrup, D., How english became the global language
    (2013), : Palgrave Macmillan US.
    cite:northrup:2013how-english
  - Crystal, D., English as a global language (2003), :
    Cambridge University Press.
    cite:crystal:2003english-global
  - Mair, C., The politics of english as a world language:
    new horizons in postcolonial cultural studies (cross
    cultures 65) (2003), : Rodopi.
    cite:mair:2003politics-english
  - Scott, J. C., Seeing like a state: how certain schemes
    to improve the human condition have failed (1998), :
    Yale University Press. 
    cite:scott:1998seeing 
  - Thompson, W. I., Darkness and scattered light: four
    talks on the future (1978), : Anchor Books.
    cite:thompson:1978darkness 
